# EU AI Act Regulation 2024/1689 - Training Dataset
# Source: EUR-Lex (© European Union)
# ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj
# Attribution: Contains information from EUR-Lex used under the EUR-Lex reuse policy

Article 31. Article 30 Notification procedure 1. Notifying authorities may notify only conformity assessment bodies which have satisfied the requirements laid down in Article 31. 2. Notifying authorities shall notify the Commission and the other Member States, using the electronic notification tool developed and managed by the Commission, of each conformity assessment body referred to in paragraph 1. 3. The notification referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article shall include full details of the conformity assessment activities, the conformity assessment module or modules, the types of AI systems concerned, and the relevant attestation of competence. Where a notification is not based on an accreditation certificate as referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 31. 4. For notified bodies which are designated under any other Union harmonisation legislation, all documents and certificates linked to those designations may be used to support their designation procedure under this Regulation, as appropriate. The notified body shall update the documentation referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article whenever relevant changes occur, in order to enable the authority responsible for notified bodies to monitor and verify continuous compliance with all the requirements laid down in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 18 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020. The three-month period referred to in this paragraph shall be reduced to 30 days in the event of non-compliance with the prohibition of the AI practices referred to in Article 5 of this Regulation. 9. The market surveillance authorities shall ensure that appropriate restrictive measures are taken in respect of the product or the AI system concerned, such as withdrawal of the product or the AI system from their market, without undue delay. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 107 Amendment to Regulation (EU) 2018/858 In Article 5 of Regulation (EU) 2018/858 the following paragraph is added: ‘4. When adopting delegated acts pursuant to paragraph 3 concerning Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*), the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2, of that Regulation shall be taken into account. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 68(1), taking into account the objectives of the adequate implementation of this Regulation, cost-effectiveness and the necessity of ensuring effective access to experts for all Member States. 3. The Commission shall facilitate timely access to the experts by the Member States, as needed, and ensure that the combination of support activities carried out by Union AI testing support pursuant to Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 5, shall be subject to administrative fines of up to EUR 750 000. 4. Before taking decisions pursuant to this Article, the European Data Protection Supervisor shall give the Union institution, body, office or agency which is the subject of the proceedings conducted by the European Data Protection Supervisor the opportunity of being heard on the matter regarding the possible infringement. The European Data Protection Supervisor shall base his or her decisions only on elements and circumstances on which the parties concerned have been able to comment. Complainants, if any, shall be associated closely with the proceedings. 5. The rights of defence of the parties concerned shall be fully respected in the proceedings. They shall be entitled to have access to the European Data Protection Supervisor’s file, subject to the legitimate interest of individuals or undertakings in the protection of their personal data or business secrets. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 78. SECTION 4 Codes of practice Article 56 Codes of practice 1. The AI Office shall encourage and facilitate the drawing up of codes of practice at Union level in order to contribute to the proper application of this Regulation, taking into account international approaches. 2. The AI Office and the Board shall aim to ensure that the codes of practice cover at least the obligations provided for in Articles 53 and 55, including the following issues: (a) the means to ensure that the information referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 98(2). 2. The scientific panel shall consist of experts selected by the Commission on the basis of up-to-date scientific or technical expertise in the field of AI necessary for the tasks set out in paragraph 3, and shall be able to demonstrate meeting all of the following conditions: (a) having particular expertise and competence and scientific or technical expertise in the field of AI; (b) independence from any provider of AI systems or general-purpose AI models; (c) an ability to carry out activities diligently, accurately and objectively. The Commission, in consultation with the Board, shall determine the number of experts on the panel in accordance with the required needs and shall ensure fair gender and geographical representation. 3. The scientific panel shall advise and support the AI Office, in particular with regard to the following tasks: (a) supporting the implementation and enforcement of this Regulation as regards general-purpose AI models and systems, in particular by: (i) alerting the AI Office of possible systemic risks at Union level of general-purpose AI models, in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 6(3)based on which the AI system is considered to be not-high-risk; 7. A short summary of the grounds on which the AI system is considered to be not-high-risk in application of the procedure under Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 6(6) and (7), Article 7(1) and (3), Article 11(3), Article 43(5) and (6), Article 47(5), Article 51(3), Article 52(4) and Article 53(5) and (6) shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 1 August 2024. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the five-year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period. 3. The delegation of power referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 on the basis of biometric data, in so far as these are not prohibited under this Regulation, and emotion recognition systems that are not prohibited under this Regulation, should be classified as high-risk. Biometric systems which are intended to be used solely for the purpose of enabling cybersecurity and personal data protection measures should not be considered to be high-risk AI systems. (55) As regards the management and operation of critical infrastructure, it is appropriate to classify as high-risk the AI systems intended to be used as safety components in the management and operation of critical digital infrastructure as listed in point (8) of the Annex to Directive (EU) 2022/2557, road traffic and the supply of water, gas, heating and electricity, since their failure or malfunctioning may put at risk the life and health of persons at large scale and lead to appreciable disruptions in the ordinary conduct of social and economic activities. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 52 Procedure 1. Where a general-purpose AI model meets the condition referred to in Article 51(1), point (a), the relevant provider shall notify the Commission without delay and in any event within two weeks after that requirement is met or it becomes known that it will be met. That notification shall include the information necessary to demonstrate that the relevant requirement has been met. If the Commission becomes aware of a general-purpose AI model presenting systemic risks of which it has not been notified, it may decide to designate it as a model with systemic risk. 2. The provider of a general-purpose AI model that meets the condition referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 16(6) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2065 for providers of hosting services to process notices on illegal content received pursuant to Article 16(1) of that Regulation and should not influence the assessment and the decision on the illegality of the specific content. That assessment should be performed solely with reference to the rules governing the legality of the content. (137) Compliance with the transparency obligations for the AI systems covered by this Regulation should not be interpreted as indicating that the use of the AI system or its output is lawful under this Regulation or other Union and Member State law and should be without prejudice to other transparency obligations for deployers of AI systems laid down in Union or national law. (138) AI is a rapidly developing family of technologies that requires regulatory oversight and a safe and controlled space for experimentation, while ensuring responsible innovation and integration of appropriate safeguards and risk mitigation measures. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 19 Automatically generated logs 1. Providers of high-risk AI systems shall keep the logs referred to in Article 12(1), automatically generated by their high-risk AI systems, to the extent such logs are under their control. Without prejudice to applicable Union or national law, the logs shall be kept for a period appropriate to the intended purpose of the high-risk AI system, of at least six months, unless provided otherwise in the applicable Union or national law, in particular in Union law on the protection of personal data. 2. Providers that are financial institutions subject to requirements regarding their internal governance, arrangements or processes under Union financial services law shall maintain the logs automatically generated by their high-risk AI systems as part of the documentation kept under the relevant financial services law. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 42(1) and (2) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 and delivered their joint opinion on 18 June 2021, HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 1 Subject matter` 1. The purpose of this Regulation is to improve the functioning of the internal market and promote the uptake of human-centric and trustworthy artificial intelligence (AI), while ensuring a high level of protection of health, safety, fundamental rights enshrined in the Charter, including democracy, the rule of law and environmental protection, against the harmful effects of AI systems in the Union and supporting innovation. 2. This Regulation lays down: (a) harmonised rules for the placing on the market, the putting into service, and the use of AI systems in the Union; (b) prohibitions of certain AI practices; (c) specific requirements for high-risk AI systems and obligations for operators of such systems; (d) harmonised transparency rules for certain AI systems; (e) harmonised rules for the placing on the market of general-purpose AI models; (f) rules on market monitoring, market surveillance, governance and enforcement; (g) measures to support innovation, with a particular focus on SMEs, including start-ups. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 29(2), or within two months of a notification by the notifying authority where it includes documentary evidence referred to in Article 29(3). 5. Where objections are raised, the Commission shall, without delay, enter into consultations with the relevant Member States and the conformity assessment body. In view thereof, the Commission shall decide whether the authorisation is justified. The Commission shall address its decision to the Member State concerned and to the relevant conformity assessment body. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 74(8) and (9), as applicable, can, upon request, immediately access the documentation or obtain a copy thereof. Only staff of the market surveillance authority holding the appropriate level of security clearance shall be allowed to access that documentation or any copy thereof. 4. Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall not affect the rights or obligations of the Commission, Member States and their relevant authorities, as well as those of notified bodies, with regard to the exchange of information and the dissemination of warnings, including in the context of cross-border cooperation, nor shall they affect the obligations of the parties concerned to provide information under criminal law of the Member States. 5. The Commission and Member States may exchange, where necessary and in accordance with relevant provisions of international and trade agreements, confidential information with regulatory authorities of third countries with which they have concluded bilateral or multilateral confidentiality arrangements guaranteeing an adequate level of confidentiality. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 45 Information obligations of notified bodies 1. Notified bodies shall inform the notifying authority of the following: (a) any Union technical documentation assessment certificates, any supplements to those certificates, and any quality management system approvals issued in accordance with the requirements of Annex VII; (b) any refusal, restriction, suspension or withdrawal of a Union technical documentation assessment certificate or a quality management system approval issued in accordance with the requirements of Annex VII; (c) any circumstances affecting the scope of or conditions for notification; (d) any request for information which they have received from market surveillance authorities regarding conformity assessment activities; (e) on request, conformity assessment activities performed within the scope of their notification and any other activity performed, including cross-border activities and subcontracting. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 59 Further processing of personal data for developing certain AI systems in the public interest in the AI regulatory sandbox 1. In the AI regulatory sandbox, personal data lawfully collected for other purposes may be processed solely for the purpose of developing, training and testing certain AI systems in the sandbox when all of the following conditions are met: (a) AI systems shall be developed for safeguarding substantial public interest by a public authority or another natural or legal person and in one or more of the following areas: (i) public safety and public health, including disease detection, diagnosis prevention, control and treatment and improvement of health care systems; (ii) a high level of protection and improvement of the quality of the environment, protection of biodiversity, protection against pollution, green transition measures, climate change mitigation and adaptation measures; (iii) energy sustainability; (iv) safety and resilience of transport systems and mobility, critical infrastructure and networks; (v) efficiency and quality of public administration and public services; (b) the data processed are necessary for complying with one or more of the requirements referred to in Chapter III, Section 2 where those requirements cannot effectively be fulfilled by processing anonymised, synthetic or other non-personal data; (c) there are effective monitoring mechanisms to identify if any high risks to the rights and freedoms of the data subjects, as referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 71 and shall include only the following information, as applicable, referred to in: (a) Section A, points 1 to 10, of Annex VIII, with the exception of points 6, 8 and 9; (b) Section B, points 1 to 5, and points 8 and 9 of Annex VIII; (c) Section C, points 1 to 3, of Annex VIII; (d) points 1, 2, 3 and 5, of Annex IX. Only the Commission and national authorities referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 98(2). This paragraph shall be without prejudice to Union or national law on the testing in real world conditions of high-risk AI systems related to products covered by Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex I. 2. Providers or prospective providers may conduct testing of high-risk AI systems referred to in Annex III in real world conditions at any time before the placing on the market or the putting into service of the AI system on their own or in partnership with one or more deployers or prospective deployers. 3. The testing of high-risk AI systems in real world conditions under this Article shall be without prejudice to any ethical review that is required by Union or national law. 4. Providers or prospective providers may conduct the testing in real world conditions only where all of the following conditions are met: (a) the provider or prospective provider has drawn up a real-world testing plan and submitted it to the market surveillance authority in the Member State where the testing in real world conditions is to be conducted; (b) the market surveillance authority in the Member State where the testing in real world conditions is to be conducted has approved the testing in real world conditions and the real-world testing plan; where the market surveillance authority has not provided an answer within 30 days, the testing in real world conditions and the real-world testing plan shall be understood to have been approved; where national law does not provide for a tacit approval, the testing in real world conditions shall remain subject to an authorisation; (c) the provider or prospective provider, with the exception of providers or prospective providers of high-risk AI systems referred to in points 1, 6 and 7 of Annex III in the areas of law enforcement, migration, asylum and border control management, and high-risk AI systems referred to in point 2 of Annex III has registered the testing in real world conditions in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 78. Article 54 Authorised representatives of providers of general-purpose AI models 1. Prior to placing a general-purpose AI model on the Union market, providers established in third countries shall, by written mandate, appoint an authorised representative which is established in the Union. 2. The provider shall enable its authorised representative to perform the tasks specified in the mandate received from the provider. 3. The authorised representative shall perform the tasks specified in the mandate received from the provider. It shall provide a copy of the mandate to the AI Office upon request, in one of the official languages of the institutions of the Union. For the purposes of this Regulation, the mandate shall empower the authorised representative to carry out the following tasks: (a) verify that the technical documentation specified in Annex XI has been drawn up and all obligations referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 20 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020. SECTION 3 Enforcement Article 74 Market surveillance and control of AI systems in the Union market 1. Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall apply to AI systems covered by this Regulation. For the purposes of the effective enforcement of this Regulation: (a) any reference to an economic operator under Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall be understood as including all operators identified in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 4 AI literacy Providers and deployers of AI systems shall take measures to ensure, to their best extent, a sufficient level of AI literacy of their staff and other persons dealing with the operation and use of AI systems on their behalf, taking into account their technical knowledge, experience, education and training and the context the AI systems are to be used in, and considering the persons or groups of persons on whom the AI systems are to be used. CHAPTER II PROHIBITED AI PRACTICES Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Official Journal of the European Union EN L series 2024/1689 12.7.2024 REGULATION (EU) 2024/1689 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 13 June 2024 laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence and amending Regulations (EC) No 300/2008, (EU) No 167/2013, (EU) No 168/2013, (EU) 2018/858, (EU) 2018/1139 and (EU) 2019/2144 and Directives 2014/90/EU, (EU) 2016/797 and (EU) 2020/1828 (Artificial Intelligence Act) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Articles 16 and 114 thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee (1), Having regard to the opinion of the European Central Bank (2), Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions (3), Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure (4), Whereas: (1) The purpose of this Regulation is to improve the functioning of the internal market by laying down a uniform legal framework in particular for the development, the placing on the market, the putting into service and the use of artificial intelligence systems (AI systems) in the Union, in accordance with Union values, to promote the uptake of human centric and trustworthy artificial intelligence (AI) while ensuring a high level of protection of health, safety, fundamental rights as enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (the ‘Charter’), including democracy, the rule of law and environmental protection, to protect against the harmful effects of AI systems in the Union, and to support innovation. Reference: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 67. The implementing acts referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 98(2). 2. Before preparing a draft implementing act, the Commission shall inform the committee referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 13; (e) a description of the implementation of human oversight measures, according to the instructions for use; (f) the measures to be taken in the case of the materialisation of those risks, including the arrangements for internal governance and complaint mechanisms. 2. The obligation laid down in paragraph 1 applies to the first use of the high-risk AI system. The deployer may, in similar cases, rely on previously conducted fundamental rights impact assessments or existing impact assessments carried out by provider. If, during the use of the high-risk AI system, the deployer considers that any of the elements listed in paragraph 1 has changed or is no longer up to date, the deployer shall take the necessary steps to update the information. 3. Once the assessment referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article has been performed, the deployer shall notify the market surveillance authority of its results, submitting the filled-out template referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article as part of the notification. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 24 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012. 3. The participants in the standardisation process shall seek to promote investment and innovation in AI, including through increasing legal certainty, as well as the competitiveness and growth of the Union market, to contribute to strengthening global cooperation on standardisation and taking into account existing international standards in the field of AI that are consistent with Union values, fundamental rights and interests, and to enhance multi-stakeholder governance ensuring a balanced representation of interests and the effective participation of all relevant stakeholders in accordance with Articles 5, 6, and 7 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 72. Where deployers have reason to consider that the use of the high-risk AI system in accordance with the instructions may result in that AI system presenting a risk within the meaning of Article 79(1), they shall, without undue delay, inform the provider or distributor and the relevant market surveillance authority, and shall suspend the use of that system. Where deployers have identified a serious incident, they shall also immediately inform first the provider, and then the importer or distributor and the relevant market surveillance authorities of that incident. If the deployer is not able to reach the provider, Article 73 shall apply mutatis mutandis. This obligation shall not cover sensitive operational data of deployers of AI systems which are law enforcement authorities. For deployers that are financial institutions subject to requirements regarding their internal governance, arrangements or processes under Union financial services law, the monitoring obligation set out in the first subparagraph shall be deemed to be fulfilled by complying with the rules on internal governance arrangements, processes and mechanisms pursuant to the relevant financial service law. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 9; (h) the setting-up, implementation and maintenance of a post-market monitoring system, in accordance with Article 72; (i) procedures related to the reporting of a serious incident in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 93 Power to request measures 1. Where necessary and appropriate, the Commission may request providers to: (a) take appropriate measures to comply with the obligations set out in Articles 53 and 54; (b) implement mitigation measures, where the evaluation carried out in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 62(1), point (c). The Commission shall proactively coordinate with national competent authorities, where relevant. Article 58 Detailed arrangements for, and functioning of, AI regulatory sandboxes 1. In order to avoid fragmentation across the Union, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts specifying the detailed arrangements for the establishment, development, implementation, operation and supervision of the AI regulatory sandboxes. The implementing acts shall include common principles on the following issues: (a) eligibility and selection criteria for participation in the AI regulatory sandbox; (b) procedures for the application, participation, monitoring, exiting from and termination of the AI regulatory sandbox, including the sandbox plan and the exit report; (c) the terms and conditions applicable to the participants. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 108 Amendments to Regulation (EU) 2018/1139 Regulation (EU) 2018/1139 is amended as follows: (1) in Article 17, the following paragraph is added: ‘3. Without prejudice to paragraph 2, when adopting implementing acts pursuant to paragraph 1 concerning Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*), the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2, of that Regulation shall be taken into account. (*) Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2024 laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence and amending Regulations (EC) No 300/2008, (EU) No 167/2013, (EU) No 168/2013, (EU) 2018/858, (EU) 2018/1139 and (EU) 2019/2144 and Directives 2014/90/EU, (EU) 2016/797 and (EU) 2020/1828 (Artificial Intelligence Act) (OJ L, 2024/1689, 12.7.2024, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj).’;" (2) in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 49(3) and (4). 4. With the exception of the section referred to in Article 49(4) and Article 60(4), point (c), the information contained in the EU database registered in accordance with Article 49 shall be accessible and publicly available in a user-friendly manner. The information should be easily navigable and machine-readable. The information registered in accordance with Article 60 shall be accessible only to market surveillance authorities and the Commission, unless the prospective provider or provider has given consent for also making the information accessible the public. 5. The EU database shall contain personal data only in so far as necessary for collecting and processing information in accordance with this Regulation. That information shall include the names and contact details of natural persons who are responsible for registering the system and have the legal authority to represent the provider or the deployer, as applicable. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 31 and of its applicable responsibilities. 2. The notifying authority shall provide the Commission, on request, with all relevant information relating to the notification or the maintenance of the competence of the notified body concerned. 3. The Commission shall ensure that all sensitive information obtained in the course of its investigations pursuant to this Article is treated confidentially in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 10 Data and data governance 1. High-risk AI systems which make use of techniques involving the training of AI models with data shall be developed on the basis of training, validation and testing data sets that meet the quality criteria referred to in paragraphs 2 to 5 whenever such data sets are used. 2. Training, validation and testing data sets shall be subject to data governance and management practices appropriate for the intended purpose of the high-risk AI system. Those practices shall concern in particular: (a) the relevant design choices; (b) data collection processes and the origin of data, and in the case of personal data, the original purpose of the data collection; (c) relevant data-preparation processing operations, such as annotation, labelling, cleaning, updating, enrichment and aggregation; (d) the formulation of assumptions, in particular with respect to the information that the data are supposed to measure and represent; (e) an assessment of the availability, quantity and suitability of the data sets that are needed; (f) examination in view of possible biases that are likely to affect the health and safety of persons, have a negative impact on fundamental rights or lead to discrimination prohibited under Union law, especially where data outputs influence inputs for future operations; (g) appropriate measures to detect, prevent and mitigate possible biases identified according to point (f); (h) the identification of relevant data gaps or shortcomings that prevent compliance with this Regulation, and how those gaps and shortcomings can be addressed. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 16 TFEU, should apply as lex specialis in respect of the rules on the processing of biometric data contained in Article 10 of Directive (EU) 2016/680, thus regulating such use and the processing of biometric data involved in an exhaustive manner. Therefore, such use and processing should be possible only in as far as it is compatible with the framework set by this Regulation, without there being scope, outside that framework, for the competent authorities, where they act for purpose of law enforcement, to use such systems and process such data in connection thereto on the grounds listed in Article 10 of Directive (EU) 2016/680. In that context, this Regulation is not intended to provide the legal basis for the processing of personal data under Article 8 of Directive (EU) 2016/680. However, the use of real-time remote biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces for purposes other than law enforcement, including by competent authorities, should not be covered by the specific framework regarding such use for the purpose of law enforcement set by this Regulation. Such use for purposes other than law enforcement should therefore not be subject to the requirement of an authorisation under this Regulation and the applicable detailed rules of national law that may give effect to that authorisation. (39) Any processing of biometric data and other personal data involved in the use of AI systems for biometric identification, other than in connection to the use of real-time remote biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces for the purpose of law enforcement as regulated by this Regulation, should continue to comply with all requirements resulting from Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 50. 7. The market surveillance authorities other than the market surveillance authority of the Member State initiating the procedure shall, without undue delay, inform the Commission and the other Member States of any measures adopted and of any additional information at their disposal relating to the non-compliance of the AI system concerned, and, in the event of disagreement with the notified national measure, of their objections. 8. Where, within three months of receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article, no objection has been raised by either a market surveillance authority of a Member State or by the Commission in respect of a provisional measure taken by a market surveillance authority of another Member State, that measure shall be deemed justified. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 10(5) and Article 59 of this Regulation. 8. This Regulation does not apply to any research, testing or development activity regarding AI systems or AI models prior to their being placed on the market or put into service. Such activities shall be conducted in accordance with applicable Union law. Testing in real world conditions shall not be covered by that exclusion. 9. This Regulation is without prejudice to the rules laid down by other Union legal acts related to consumer protection and product safety. 10. This Regulation does not apply to obligations of deployers who are natural persons using AI systems in the course of a purely personal non-professional activity. 11. This Regulation does not preclude the Union or Member States from maintaining or introducing laws, regulations or administrative provisions which are more favourable to workers in terms of protecting their rights in respect of the use of AI systems by employers, or from encouraging or allowing the application of collective agreements which are more favourable to workers. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 67 may be invited to such sub-groups or to specific meetings of those subgroups as observers. 7. The Board shall be organised and operated so as to safeguard the objectivity and impartiality of its activities. 8. The Board shall be chaired by one of the representatives of the Member States. The AI Office shall provide the secretariat for the Board, convene the meetings upon request of the Chair, and prepare the agenda in accordance with the tasks of the Board pursuant to this Regulation and its rules of procedure. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 31 or they ensure an equivalent level of compliance. SECTION 5 Standards, conformity assessment, certificates, registration Article 40 Harmonised standards and standardisation deliverables 1. High-risk AI systems or general-purpose AI models which are in conformity with harmonised standards or parts thereof the references of which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 shall be presumed to be in conformity with the requirements set out in Section 2 of this Chapter or, as applicable, with the obligations set out in of Chapter V, Sections 2 and 3, of this Regulation, to the extent that those standards cover those requirements or obligations. 2. In accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 6(3); 8. The status of the AI system (on the market, or in service; no longer placed on the market/in service, recalled); 9. Any Member States in which the AI system has been placed on the market, put into service or made available in the Union. Section C — Information to be submitted by deployers of high-risk AI systems in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 12(1), to the extent such logs are under their control. 3. Any information obtained by a competent authority pursuant to this Article shall be treated in accordance with the confidentiality obligations set out in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 97 to amend the thresholds listed in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, as well as to supplement benchmarks and indicators in light of evolving technological developments, such as algorithmic improvements or increased hardware efficiency, when necessary, for these thresholds to reflect the state of the art. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 97 in order to amend paragraph 3, second subparagraph, of this Article by deleting any of the conditions laid down therein, where there is concrete and reliable evidence that this is necessary to maintain the level of protection of health, safety and fundamental rights provided for by this Regulation. 8. Any amendment to the conditions laid down in paragraph 3, second subparagraph, adopted in accordance with paragraphs 6 and 7 of this Article shall not decrease the overall level of protection of health, safety and fundamental rights provided for by this Regulation and shall ensure consistency with the delegated acts adopted pursuant to Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 57, the following subparagraph is added: ‘When adopting those implementing acts concerning Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2024/1689, the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2, of that Regulation shall be taken into account.’ ; (6) in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 47; 12. Electronic instructions for use; this information shall not be provided for high-risk AI systems in the areas of law enforcement or migration, asylum and border control management referred to in Annex III, points 1, 6 and 7; 13. A URL for additional information (optional). Section B — Information to be submitted by providers of high-risk AI systems in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 81 Union safeguard procedure 1. Where, within three months of receipt of the notification referred to in Article 79(5), or within 30 days in the case of non-compliance with the prohibition of the AI practices referred to in Article 5, objections are raised by the market surveillance authority of a Member State to a measure taken by another market surveillance authority, or where the Commission considers the measure to be contrary to Union law, the Commission shall without undue delay enter into consultation with the market surveillance authority of the relevant Member State and the operator or operators, and shall evaluate the national measure. On the basis of the results of that evaluation, the Commission shall, within six months, or within 60 days in the case of non-compliance with the prohibition of the AI practices referred to in Article 5, starting from the notification referred to in Article 79(5), decide whether the national measure is justified and shall notify its decision to the market surveillance authority of the Member State concerned. The Commission shall also inform all other market surveillance authorities of its decision. 2. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 28 to allow that authority to conduct its assessment, designation, notification and monitoring activities, and to facilitate the assessment outlined in this Section. Article 35 Identification numbers and lists of notified bodies 1. The Commission shall assign a single identification number to each notified body, even where a body is notified under more than one Union act. 2. The Commission shall make publicly available the list of the bodies notified under this Regulation, including their identification numbers and the activities for which they have been notified. The Commission shall ensure that the list is kept up to date. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 56 (6). If it deems the code is not adequate, the Commission may adopt an implementing act specifying common rules for the implementation of those obligations in accordance with the examination procedure laid down in Article 98(2). CHAPTER V GENERAL-PURPOSE AI MODELS SECTION 1 Classification rules Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 261 TFEU. (170) Union and national law already provide effective remedies to natural and legal persons whose rights and freedoms are adversely affected by the use of AI systems. Without prejudice to those remedies, any natural or legal person that has grounds to consider that there has been an infringement of this Regulation should be entitled to lodge a complaint to the relevant market surveillance authority. (171) Affected persons should have the right to obtain an explanation where a deployer’s decision is based mainly upon the output from certain high-risk AI systems that fall within the scope of this Regulation and where that decision produces legal effects or similarly significantly affects those persons in a way that they consider to have an adverse impact on their health, safety or fundamental rights. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 95; (f) that AI regulatory sandboxes facilitate the involvement of other relevant actors within the AI ecosystem, such as notified bodies and standardisation organisations, SMEs, including start-ups, enterprises, innovators, testing and experimentation facilities, research and experimentation labs and European Digital Innovation Hubs, centres of excellence, individual researchers, in order to allow and facilitate cooperation with the public and private sectors; (g) that procedures, processes and administrative requirements for application, selection, participation and exiting the AI regulatory sandbox are simple, easily intelligible, and clearly communicated in order to facilitate the participation of SMEs, including start-ups, with limited legal and administrative capacities and are streamlined across the Union, in order to avoid fragmentation and that participation in an AI regulatory sandbox established by a Member State, or by the European Data Protection Supervisor is mutually and uniformly recognised and carries the same legal effects across the Union; (h) that participation in the AI regulatory sandbox is limited to a period that is appropriate to the complexity and scale of the project and that may be extended by the national competent authority; (i) that AI regulatory sandboxes facilitate the development of tools and infrastructure for testing, benchmarking, assessing and explaining dimensions of AI systems relevant for regulatory learning, such as accuracy, robustness and cybersecurity, as well as measures to mitigate risks to fundamental rights and society at large. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 95 Codes of conduct for voluntary application of specific requirements 1. The AI Office and the Member States shall encourage and facilitate the drawing up of codes of conduct, including related governance mechanisms, intended to foster the voluntary application to AI systems, other than high-risk AI systems, of some or all of the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2 taking into account the available technical solutions and industry best practices allowing for the application of such requirements. 2. The AI Office and the Member States shall facilitate the drawing up of codes of conduct concerning the voluntary application, including by deployers, of specific requirements to all AI systems, on the basis of clear objectives and key performance indicators to measure the achievement of those objectives, including elements such as, but not limited to: (a) applicable elements provided for in Union ethical guidelines for trustworthy AI; (b) assessing and minimising the impact of AI systems on environmental sustainability, including as regards energy-efficient programming and techniques for the efficient design, training and use of AI; (c) promoting AI literacy, in particular that of persons dealing with the development, operation and use of AI; (d) facilitating an inclusive and diverse design of AI systems, including through the establishment of inclusive and diverse development teams and the promotion of stakeholders’ participation in that process; (e) assessing and preventing the negative impact of AI systems on vulnerable persons or groups of vulnerable persons, including as regards accessibility for persons with a disability, as well as on gender equality. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 24 Obligations of distributors 1. Before making a high-risk AI system available on the market, distributors shall verify that it bears the required CE marking, that it is accompanied by a copy of the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 37 Challenge to the competence of notified bodies 1. The Commission shall, where necessary, investigate all cases where there are reasons to doubt the competence of a notified body or the continued fulfilment by a notified body of the requirements laid down in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 53(1), point (b) — technical documentation for providers of general-purpose AI models to downstream providers that integrate the model into their AI system The information referred to in Article 53(1), point (b) shall contain at least the following: 1. A general description of the general-purpose AI model including: (a) the tasks that the model is intended to perform and the type and nature of AI systems into which it can be integrated; (b) the acceptable use policies applicable; (c) the date of release and methods of distribution; (d) how the model interacts, or can be used to interact, with hardware or software that is not part of the model itself, where applicable; (e) the versions of relevant software related to the use of the general-purpose AI model, where applicable; (f) the architecture and number of parameters; (g) the modality (e.g. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 91 Power to request documentation and information 1. The Commission may request the provider of the general-purpose AI model concerned to provide the documentation drawn up by the provider in accordance with Articles 53 and 55, or any additional information that is necessary for the purpose of assessing compliance of the provider with this Regulation. 2. Before sending the request for information, the AI Office may initiate a structured dialogue with the provider of the general-purpose AI model. 3. Upon a duly substantiated request from the scientific panel, the Commission may issue a request for information to a provider of a general-purpose AI model, where the access to information is necessary and proportionate for the fulfilment of the tasks of the scientific panel under Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 4(3) of Directive (EU) 2019/790; (d) draw up and make publicly available a sufficiently detailed summary about the content used for training of the general-purpose AI model, according to a template provided by the AI Office. 2. The obligations set out in paragraph 1, points (a) and (b), shall not apply to providers of AI models that are released under a free and open-source licence that allows for the access, usage, modification, and distribution of the model, and whose parameters, including the weights, the information on the model architecture, and the information on model usage, are made publicly available. This exception shall not apply to general-purpose AI models with systemic risks. 3. Providers of general-purpose AI models shall cooperate as necessary with the Commission and the national competent authorities in the exercise of their competences and powers pursuant to this Regulation. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 36 Changes to notifications 1. The notifying authority shall notify the Commission and the other Member States of any relevant changes to the notification of a notified body via the electronic notification tool referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 56 to demonstrate compliance with the obligations set out in paragraph 1 of this Article, until a harmonised standard is published. Compliance with European harmonised standards grants providers the presumption of conformity to the extent that those standards cover those obligations. Providers of general-purpose AI models who do not adhere to an approved code of practice or do not comply with a European harmonised standard shall demonstrate alternative adequate means of compliance for assessment by the Commission. 5. For the purpose of facilitating compliance with Annex XI, in particular points 2 (d) and (e) thereof, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 50; (e) detailed information on the relationship of this Regulation with the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex I, as well as with other relevant Union law, including as regards consistency in their enforcement; (f) the application of the definition of an AI system as set out in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 69 Access to the pool of experts by the Member States 1. Member States may call upon experts of the scientific panel to support their enforcement activities under this Regulation. 2. The Member States may be required to pay fees for the advice and support provided by the experts. The structure and the level of fees as well as the scale and structure of recoverable costs shall be set out in the implementing act referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 78. 4. Where the Commission ascertains that a notified body does not meet or no longer meets the requirements for its notification, it shall inform the notifying Member State accordingly and request it to take the necessary corrective measures, including the suspension or withdrawal of the notification if necessary. Where the Member State fails to take the necessary corrective measures, the Commission may, by means of an implementing act, suspend, restrict or withdraw the designation. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 60(4), point (b), the decision or the objection shall indicate the grounds therefor and how the provider or prospective provider can challenge the decision or objection. 5. Where applicable, where a market surveillance authority has taken a decision referred to in paragraph 3, it shall communicate the grounds therefor to the market surveillance authorities of other Member States in which the AI system has been tested in accordance with the testing plan. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 6(1) related to products covered by the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Section B of Annex I, only Article 6(1), Articles 102 to 109 and Article 112 apply. Article 57 applies only in so far as the requirements for high-risk AI systems under this Regulation have been integrated in that Union harmonisation legislation. 3. This Regulation does not apply to areas outside the scope of Union law, and shall not, in any event, affect the competences of the Member States concerning national security, regardless of the type of entity entrusted by the Member States with carrying out tasks in relation to those competences. This Regulation does not apply to AI systems where and in so far they are placed on the market, put into service, or used with or without modification exclusively for military, defence or national security purposes, regardless of the type of entity carrying out those activities. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 74(8) or (9), as applicable, shall act as a notified body. 2. For high-risk AI systems referred to in points 2 to 8 of Annex III, providers shall follow the conformity assessment procedure based on internal control as referred to in Annex VI, which does not provide for the involvement of a notified body. 3. For high-risk AI systems covered by the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Section A of Annex I, the provider shall follow the relevant conformity assessment procedure as required under those legal acts. The requirements set out in Section 2 of this Chapter shall apply to those high-risk AI systems and shall be part of that assessment. Points 4.3., 4.4., 4.5. and the fifth paragraph of point 4.6 of Annex VII shall also apply. For the purposes of that assessment, notified bodies which have been notified under those legal acts shall be entitled to control the conformity of the high-risk AI systems with the requirements set out in Section 2, provided that the compliance of those notified bodies with requirements laid down in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 99. 8. In exercising their power to monitor the application of this Article, and in accordance with Article 11 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, market surveillance authorities may perform appropriate checks, taking into account in particular information stored in the EU database referred to in Article 71 of this Regulation. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 97(2) to amend Annexes XI and XII in light of evolving technological developments. 7. Any information or documentation obtained pursuant to this Article, including trade secrets, shall be treated in accordance with the confidentiality obligations set out in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 18 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, which should apply mutatis mutandis, without prejudice to more specific procedural rights provided for by this Regulation. (165) The development of AI systems other than high-risk AI systems in accordance with the requirements of this Regulation may lead to a larger uptake of ethical and trustworthy AI in the Union. Providers of AI systems that are not high-risk should be encouraged to create codes of conduct, including related governance mechanisms, intended to foster the voluntary application of some or all of the mandatory requirements applicable to high-risk AI systems, adapted in light of the intended purpose of the systems and the lower risk involved and taking into account the available technical solutions and industry best practices such as model and data cards. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 73 Reporting of serious incidents 1. Providers of high-risk AI systems placed on the Union market shall report any serious incident to the market surveillance authorities of the Member States where that incident occurred. 2. The report referred to in paragraph 1 shall be made immediately after the provider has established a causal link between the AI system and the serious incident or the reasonable likelihood of such a link, and, in any event, not later than 15 days after the provider or, where applicable, the deployer, becomes aware of the serious incident. The period for the reporting referred to in the first subparagraph shall take account of the severity of the serious incident. 3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2 of this Article, in the event of a widespread infringement or a serious incident as defined in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 3(4) of Directive (EU) 2016/680, or to assess personality traits and characteristics or past criminal behaviour of natural persons or groups; (e) AI systems intended to be used by or on behalf of law enforcement authorities or by Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies in support of law enforcement authorities for the profiling of natural persons as referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 75(3), market surveillance authorities may request the Commission to exercise the powers laid down in this Section, where that is necessary and proportionate to assist with the fulfilment of their tasks under this Regulation. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 79(1) or in a substantial modification; (b) facilitating the post-market monitoring referred to in Article 72; and (c) monitoring the operation of high-risk AI systems referred to in Article 26(5). 3. For high-risk AI systems referred to in point 1 (a), of Annex III, the logging capabilities shall provide, at a minimum: (a) recording of the period of each use of the system (start date and time and end date and time of each use); (b) the reference database against which input data has been checked by the system; (c) the input data for which the search has led to a match; (d) the identification of the natural persons involved in the verification of the results, as referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 51. 2. Upon such qualified alert, the Commission, through the AI Office and after having informed the Board, may exercise the powers laid down in this Section for the purpose of assessing the matter. The AI Office shall inform the Board of any measure according to Articles 91 to 94. 3. A qualified alert shall be duly reasoned and indicate at least: (a) the point of contact of the provider of the general-purpose AI model with systemic risk concerned; (b) a description of the relevant facts and the reasons for the alert by the scientific panel; (c) any other information that the scientific panel considers to be relevant, including, where appropriate, information gathered on its own initiative. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 53, unless they declare explicitly their interest to join the full code. 8. The AI Office shall, as appropriate, also encourage and facilitate the review and adaptation of the codes of practice, in particular in light of emerging standards. The AI Office shall assist in the assessment of available standards. 9. Codes of practice shall be ready at the latest by 2 May 2025. The AI Office shall take the necessary steps, including inviting providers pursuant to paragraph 7. If, by 2 August 2025, a code of practice cannot be finalised, or if the AI Office deems it is not adequate following its assessment under paragraph 6 of this Article, the Commission may provide, by means of implementing acts, common rules for the implementation of the obligations provided for in Articles 53 and 55, including the issues set out in paragraph 2 of this Article. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 65 Establishment and structure of the European Artificial Intelligence Board 1. A European Artificial Intelligence Board (the ‘Board’) is hereby established. 2. The Board shall be composed of one representative per Member State. The European Data Protection Supervisor shall participate as observer. The AI Office shall also attend the Board’s meetings, without taking part in the votes. Other national and Union authorities, bodies or experts may be invited to the meetings by the Board on a case by case basis, where the issues discussed are of relevance for them. 3. Each representative shall be designated by their Member State for a period of three years, renewable once. 4. Member States shall ensure that their representatives on the Board: (a) have the relevant competences and powers in their Member State so as to contribute actively to the achievement of the Board’s tasks referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 20 Corrective actions and duty of information 1. Providers of high-risk AI systems which consider or have reason to consider that a high-risk AI system that they have placed on the market or put into service is not in conformity with this Regulation shall immediately take the necessary corrective actions to bring that system into conformity, to withdraw it, to disable it, or to recall it, as appropriate. They shall inform the distributors of the high-risk AI system concerned and, where applicable, the deployers, the authorised representative and importers accordingly. 2. Where the high-risk AI system presents a risk within the meaning of Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 66; (b) are designated as a single contact point vis-à-vis the Board and, where appropriate, taking into account Member States’ needs, as a single contact point for stakeholders; (c) are empowered to facilitate consistency and coordination between national competent authorities in their Member State as regards the implementation of this Regulation, including through the collection of relevant data and information for the purpose of fulfilling their tasks on the Board. 5. The designated representatives of the Member States shall adopt the Board’s rules of procedure by a two-thirds majority. The rules of procedure shall, in particular, lay down procedures for the selection process, the duration of the mandate of, and specifications of the tasks of, the Chair, detailed arrangements for voting, and the organisation of the Board’s activities and those of its sub-groups. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 15 against which the high-risk AI system has been tested and validated and which can be expected, and any known and foreseeable circumstances that may have an impact on that expected level of accuracy, robustness and cybersecurity; (iii) any known or foreseeable circumstance, related to the use of the high-risk AI system in accordance with its intended purpose or under conditions of reasonably foreseeable misuse, which may lead to risks to the health and safety or fundamental rights referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 16 Obligations of providers of high-risk AI systems Providers of high-risk AI systems shall: (a) ensure that their high-risk AI systems are compliant with the requirements set out in Section 2; (b) indicate on the high-risk AI system or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or its accompanying documentation, as applicable, their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, the address at which they can be contacted; (c) have a quality management system in place which complies with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 10(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012; or (iii) the relevant harmonised standards insufficiently address fundamental rights concerns; or (iv) the harmonised standards do not comply with the request; and (b) no reference to harmonised standards covering the requirements referred to in Section 2 of this Chapter or, as applicable, the obligations referred to in Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter V has been published in the Official Journal of the European Union in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012, and no such reference is expected to be published within a reasonable period. When drafting the common specifications, the Commission shall consult the advisory forum referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 63 Derogations for specific operators 1. Microenterprises within the meaning of Recommendation 2003/361/EC may comply with certain elements of the quality management system required by Article 17 of this Regulation in a simplified manner, provided that they do not have partner enterprises or linked enterprises within the meaning of that Recommendation. For that purpose, the Commission shall develop guidelines on the elements of the quality management system which may be complied with in a simplified manner considering the needs of microenterprises, without affecting the level of protection or the need for compliance with the requirements in respect of high-risk AI systems. 2. Paragraph 1 of this Article shall not be interpreted as exempting those operators from fulfilling any other requirements or obligations laid down in this Regulation, including those established in Articles 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 72 and 73. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 109 Amendment to Regulation (EU) 2019/2144 In Article 11 of Regulation (EU) 2019/2144, the following paragraph is added: ‘3. When adopting the implementing acts pursuant to paragraph 2, concerning artificial intelligence systems which are safety components within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*), the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2, of that Regulation shall be taken into account. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 73. The provider or prospective provider shall adopt immediate mitigation measures or, failing that, shall suspend the testing in real world conditions until such mitigation takes place, or otherwise terminate it. The provider or prospective provider shall establish a procedure for the prompt recall of the AI system upon such termination of the testing in real world conditions. 8. Providers or prospective providers shall notify the national market surveillance authority in the Member State where the testing in real world conditions is to be conducted of the suspension or termination of the testing in real world conditions and of the final outcomes. 9. The provider or prospective provider shall be liable under applicable Union and national liability law for any damage caused in the course of their testing in real world conditions. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 77 Powers of authorities protecting fundamental rights 1. National public authorities or bodies which supervise or enforce the respect of obligations under Union law protecting fundamental rights, including the right to non-discrimination, in relation to the use of high-risk AI systems referred to in Annex III shall have the power to request and access any documentation created or maintained under this Regulation in accessible language and format when access to that documentation is necessary for effectively fulfilling their mandates within the limits of their jurisdiction. The relevant public authority or body shall inform the market surveillance authority of the Member State concerned of any such request. 2. By 2 November 2024, each Member State shall identify the public authorities or bodies referred to in paragraph 1 and make a list of them publicly available. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 3, point (49)(c) of this Regulation, and shall be made to the national competent authority chosen for that purpose by the Member States where the incident occurred. 11. National competent authorities shall immediately notify the Commission of any serious incident, whether or not they have taken action on it, in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 46(1), deployers may be exempt from that obligation to notify. 4. If any of the obligations laid down in this Article is already met through the data protection impact assessment conducted pursuant to Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 97 in order to amend Annexes VI and VII by updating them in light of technical progress. 6. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 97 in order to amend paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article in order to subject high-risk AI systems referred to in points 2 to 8 of Annex III to the conformity assessment procedure referred to in Annex VII or parts thereof. The Commission shall adopt such delegated acts taking into account the effectiveness of the conformity assessment procedure based on internal control referred to in Annex VI in preventing or minimising the risks to health and safety and protection of fundamental rights posed by such systems, as well as the availability of adequate capacities and resources among notified bodies. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 101 for supplying incorrect, incomplete or misleading information. 5. The provider of the general-purpose AI model concerned, or its representative shall supply the information requested. In the case of legal persons, companies or firms, or where the provider has no legal personality, the persons authorised to represent them by law or by their statutes, shall supply the information requested on behalf of the provider of the general-purpose AI model concerned. Lawyers duly authorised to act may supply information on behalf of their clients. The clients shall nevertheless remain fully responsible if the information supplied is incomplete, incorrect or misleading. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 41, covering all requirements set out in Section 2 of this Chapter. 4. High-risk AI systems that have already been subject to a conformity assessment procedure shall undergo a new conformity assessment procedure in the event of a substantial modification, regardless of whether the modified system is intended to be further distributed or continues to be used by the current deployer. For high-risk AI systems that continue to learn after being placed on the market or put into service, changes to the high-risk AI system and its performance that have been pre-determined by the provider at the moment of the initial conformity assessment and are part of the information contained in the technical documentation referred to in point 2(f) of Annex IV, shall not constitute a substantial modification. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 49(2) The following information shall be provided and thereafter kept up to date with regard to AI systems to be registered in accordance with Article 49(2): 1. The name, address and contact details of the provider; 2. Where submission of information is carried out by another person on behalf of the provider, the name, address and contact details of that person; 3. The name, address and contact details of the authorised representative, where applicable; 4. The AI system trade name and any additional unambiguous reference allowing the identification and traceability of the AI system; 5. A description of the intended purpose of the AI system; 6. The condition or conditions under Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 5 or 50. Article 3 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: (1) ‘AI system’ means a machine-based system that is designed to operate with varying levels of autonomy and that may exhibit adaptiveness after deployment, and that, for explicit or implicit objectives, infers, from the input it receives, how to generate outputs such as predictions, content, recommendations, or decisions that can influence physical or virtual environments; (2) ‘risk’ means the combination of the probability of an occurrence of harm and the severity of that harm; (3) ‘provider’ means a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body that develops an AI system or a general-purpose AI model or that has an AI system or a general-purpose AI model developed and places it on the market or puts the AI system into service under its own name or trademark, whether for payment or free of charge; (4) ‘deployer’ means a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body using an AI system under its authority except where the AI system is used in the course of a personal non-professional activity; (5) ‘authorised representative’ means a natural or legal person located or established in the Union who has received and accepted a written mandate from a provider of an AI system or a general-purpose AI model to, respectively, perform and carry out on its behalf the obligations and procedures established by this Regulation; (6) ‘importer’ means a natural or legal person located or established in the Union that places on the market an AI system that bears the name or trademark of a natural or legal person established in a third country; (7) ‘distributor’ means a natural or legal person in the supply chain, other than the provider or the importer, that makes an AI system available on the Union market; (8) ‘operator’ means a provider, product manufacturer, deployer, authorised representative, importer or distributor; (9) ‘placing on the market’ means the first making available of an AI system or a general-purpose AI model on the Union market; (10) ‘making available on the market’ means the supply of an AI system or a general-purpose AI model for distribution or use on the Union market in the course of a commercial activity, whether in return for payment or free of charge; (11) ‘putting into service’ means the supply of an AI system for first use directly to the deployer or for own use in the Union for its intended purpose; (12) ‘intended purpose’ means the use for which an AI system is intended by the provider, including the specific context and conditions of use, as specified in the information supplied by the provider in the instructions for use, promotional or sales materials and statements, as well as in the technical documentation; (13) ‘reasonably foreseeable misuse’ means the use of an AI system in a way that is not in accordance with its intended purpose, but which may result from reasonably foreseeable human behaviour or interaction with other systems, including other AI systems; (14) ‘safety component’ means a component of a product or of an AI system which fulfils a safety function for that product or AI system, or the failure or malfunctioning of which endangers the health and safety of persons or property; (15) ‘instructions for use’ means the information provided by the provider to inform the deployer of, in particular, an AI system’s intended purpose and proper use; (16) ‘recall of an AI system’ means any measure aiming to achieve the return to the provider or taking out of service or disabling the use of an AI system made available to deployers; (17) ‘withdrawal of an AI system’ means any measure aiming to prevent an AI system in the supply chain being made available on the market; (18) ‘performance of an AI system’ means the ability of an AI system to achieve its intended purpose; (19) ‘notifying authority’ means the national authority responsible for setting up and carrying out the necessary procedures for the assessment, designation and notification of conformity assessment bodies and for their monitoring; (20) ‘conformity assessment’ means the process of demonstrating whether the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2 relating to a high-risk AI system have been fulfilled; (21) ‘conformity assessment body’ means a body that performs third-party conformity assessment activities, including testing, certification and inspection; (22) ‘notified body’ means a conformity assessment body notified in accordance with this Regulation and other relevant Union harmonisation legislation; (23) ‘substantial modification’ means a change to an AI system after its placing on the market or putting into service which is not foreseen or planned in the initial conformity assessment carried out by the provider and as a result of which the compliance of the AI system with the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2 is affected or results in a modification to the intended purpose for which the AI system has been assessed; (24) ‘CE marking’ means a marking by which a provider indicates that an AI system is in conformity with the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2 and other applicable Union harmonisation legislation providing for its affixing; (25) ‘post-market monitoring system’ means all activities carried out by providers of AI systems to collect and review experience gained from the use of AI systems they place on the market or put into service for the purpose of identifying any need to immediately apply any necessary corrective or preventive actions; (26) ‘market surveillance authority’ means the national authority carrying out the activities and taking the measures pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2019/1020; (27) ‘harmonised standard’ means a harmonised standard as defined in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 47; 5. Where an AI system involves the processing of personal data, a statement that that AI system complies with Regulations (EU) 2016/679 and (EU) 2018/1725 and Directive (EU) 2016/680; 6. References to any relevant harmonised standards used or any other common specification in relation to which conformity is declared; 7. Where applicable, the name and identification number of the notified body, a description of the conformity assessment procedure performed, and identification of the certificate issued; 8. The place and date of issue of the declaration, the name and function of the person who signed it, as well as an indication for, or on behalf of whom, that person signed, a signature. ANNEX VI Conformity assessment procedure based on internal control 1. The conformity assessment procedure based on internal control is the conformity assessment procedure based on points 2, 3 and 4. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 74(11), without prejudice to the powers of market surveillance authorities; (d) supporting the AI Office in carrying out its duties in the context of the Union safeguard procedure pursuant to Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 44 Certificates 1. Certificates issued by notified bodies in accordance with Annex VII shall be drawn-up in a language which can be easily understood by the relevant authorities in the Member State in which the notified body is established. 2. Certificates shall be valid for the period they indicate, which shall not exceed five years for AI systems covered by Annex I, and four years for AI systems covered by Annex III. At the request of the provider, the validity of a certificate may be extended for further periods, each not exceeding five years for AI systems covered by Annex I, and four years for AI systems covered by Annex III, based on a re-assessment in accordance with the applicable conformity assessment procedures. Any supplement to a certificate shall remain valid, provided that the certificate which it supplements is valid. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 78. 6. By 2 August 2025, and once every two years thereafter, Member States shall report to the Commission on the status of the financial and human resources of the national competent authorities, with an assessment of their adequacy. The Commission shall transmit that information to the Board for discussion and possible recommendations. 7. The Commission shall facilitate the exchange of experience between national competent authorities. 8. National competent authorities may provide guidance and advice on the implementation of this Regulation, in particular to SMEs including start-ups, taking into account the guidance and advice of the Board and the Commission, as appropriate. Whenever national competent authorities intend to provide guidance and advice with regard to an AI system in areas covered by other Union law, the national competent authorities under that Union law shall be consulted, as appropriate. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 54(3) of Regulation (EU) 2019/881, high-risk AI systems that have been certified or for which a statement of conformity has been issued under a cybersecurity scheme pursuant to that Regulation and the references of which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union should be presumed to comply with the cybersecurity requirement of this Regulation in so far as the cybersecurity certificate or statement of conformity or parts thereof cover the cybersecurity requirement of this Regulation. This remains without prejudice to the voluntary nature of that cybersecurity scheme. (123) In order to ensure a high level of trustworthiness of high-risk AI systems, those systems should be subject to a conformity assessment prior to their placing on the market or putting into service. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 51 Classification of general-purpose AI models as general-purpose AI models with systemic risk 1. A general-purpose AI model shall be classified as a general-purpose AI model with systemic risk if it meets any of the following conditions: (a) it has high impact capabilities evaluated on the basis of appropriate technical tools and methodologies, including indicators and benchmarks; (b) based on a decision of the Commission, ex officio or following a qualified alert from the scientific panel, it has capabilities or an impact equivalent to those set out in point (a) having regard to the criteria set out in Annex XIII. 2. A general-purpose AI model shall be presumed to have high impact capabilities pursuant to paragraph 1, point (a), when the cumulative amount of computation used for its training measured in floating point operations is greater than 1025. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 46, the functioning of AI regulatory sandboxes, and testing in real world conditions referred to in Articles 57, 59 and 60; (e) at the request of the Commission or on its own initiative, issue recommendations and written opinions on any relevant matters related to the implementation of this Regulation and to its consistent and effective application, including: (i) on the development and application of codes of conduct and codes of practice pursuant to this Regulation, as well as of the Commission’s guidelines; (ii) the evaluation and review of this Regulation pursuant to Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 90(1), point (a), on the basis of criteria set out in Annex XIII. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 97 in order to amend Annex XIII by specifying and updating the criteria set out in that Annex. 5. Upon a reasoned request of a provider whose model has been designated as a general-purpose AI model with systemic risk pursuant to paragraph 4, the Commission shall take the request into account and may decide to reassess whether the general-purpose AI model can still be considered to present systemic risks on the basis of the criteria set out in Annex XIII. Such a request shall contain objective, detailed and new reasons that have arisen since the designation decision. Providers may request reassessment at the earliest six months after the designation decision. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 87 Reporting of infringements and protection of reporting persons Directive (EU) 2019/1937 shall apply to the reporting of infringements of this Regulation and the protection of persons reporting such infringements. SECTION 5 Supervision, investigation, enforcement and monitoring in respect of providers of general-purpose AI models Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 5; and (c) the list of AI systems requiring additional transparency measures pursuant to Article 50. 12. Any amendment to this Regulation pursuant to paragraph 10, or relevant delegated or implementing acts, which concerns sectoral Union harmonisation legislation listed in Section B of Annex I shall take into account the regulatory specificities of each sector, and the existing governance, conformity assessment and enforcement mechanisms and authorities established therein. 13. By 2 August 2031, the Commission shall carry out an assessment of the enforcement of this Regulation and shall report on it to the European Parliament, the Council and the European Economic and Social Committee, taking into account the first years of application of this Regulation. On the basis of the findings, that report shall, where appropriate, be accompanied by a proposal for amendment of this Regulation with regard to the structure of enforcement and the need for a Union agency to resolve any identified shortcomings. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 5(1), first subparagraph, point (g), to the extent it applies to the use of biometric categorisation systems for activities in the field of police cooperation and judicial cooperation in criminal matters, Article 5(1), first subparagraph, point (d), to the extent it applies to the use of AI systems covered by that provision, Article 5(1), first subparagraph, point (h), (2) to (6) and Article 26(10) of this Regulation adopted on the basis of Article 16 TFEU, or subject to their application, which relate to the processing of personal data by the Member States when carrying out activities falling within the scope of Chapter 4 or Chapter 5 of Title V of Part Three of the TFEU. (42) In line with the presumption of innocence, natural persons in the Union should always be judged on their actual behaviour. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 98(2). CHAPTER VI MEASURES IN SUPPORT OF INNOVATION Article 57 AI regulatory sandboxes 1. Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities establish at least one AI regulatory sandbox at national level, which shall be operational by 2 August 2026. That sandbox may also be established jointly with the competent authorities of other Member States. The Commission may provide technical support, advice and tools for the establishment and operation of AI regulatory sandboxes. The obligation under the first subparagraph may also be fulfilled by participating in an existing sandbox in so far as that participation provides an equivalent level of national coverage for the participating Member States. 2. Additional AI regulatory sandboxes at regional or local level, or established jointly with the competent authorities of other Member States may also be established. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 86 Right to explanation of individual decision-making 1. Any affected person subject to a decision which is taken by the deployer on the basis of the output from a high-risk AI system listed in Annex III, with the exception of systems listed under point 2 thereof, and which produces legal effects or similarly significantly affects that person in a way that they consider to have an adverse impact on their health, safety or fundamental rights shall have the right to obtain from the deployer clear and meaningful explanations of the role of the AI system in the decision-making procedure and the main elements of the decision taken. 2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to the use of AI systems for which exceptions from, or restrictions to, the obligation under that paragraph follow from Union or national law in compliance with Union law. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 16 under either of the following circumstances: (a) the high-risk AI system is placed on the market together with the product under the name or trademark of the product manufacturer; (b) the high-risk AI system is put into service under the name or trademark of the product manufacturer after the product has been placed on the market. 4. The provider of a high-risk AI system and the third party that supplies an AI system, tools, services, components, or processes that are used or integrated in a high-risk AI system shall, by written agreement, specify the necessary information, capabilities, technical access and other assistance based on the generally acknowledged state of the art, in order to enable the provider of the high-risk AI system to fully comply with the obligations set out in this Regulation. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 8 Compliance with the requirements 1. High-risk AI systems shall comply with the requirements laid down in this Section, taking into account their intended purpose as well as the generally acknowledged state of the art on AI and AI-related technologies. The risk management system referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 27; 5. A summary of the data protection impact assessment carried out in accordance with Article 35 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 or Article 27 of Directive (EU) 2016/680 as specified in Article 26(8) of this Regulation, where applicable. ANNEX IX Information to be submitted upon the registration of high-risk AI systems listed in Annex III in relation to testing in real world conditions in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 9; 6. A description of relevant changes made by the provider to the system through its lifecycle; 7. A list of the harmonised standards applied in full or in part the references of which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union; where no such harmonised standards have been applied, a detailed description of the solutions adopted to meet the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2, including a list of other relevant standards and technical specifications applied; 8. A copy of the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 5 as referred to in Article 113(3), point (a), this Regulation shall apply to operators of high-risk AI systems, other than the systems referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, that have been placed on the market or put into service before 2 August 2026, only if, as from that date, those systems are subject to significant changes in their designs. In any case, the providers and deployers of high-risk AI systems intended to be used by public authorities shall take the necessary steps to comply with the requirements and obligations of this Regulation by 2 August 2030. 3. Providers of general-purpose AI models that have been placed on the market before 2 August 2025 shall take the necessary steps in order to comply with the obligations laid down in this Regulation by 2 August 2027. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 84 and experts pursuant to this Article is efficiently organised and provides the best possible added value. SECTION 2 National competent authorities Article 70 Designation of national competent authorities and single points of contact 1. Each Member State shall establish or designate as national competent authorities at least one notifying authority and at least one market surveillance authority for the purposes of this Regulation. Those national competent authorities shall exercise their powers independently, impartially and without bias so as to safeguard the objectivity of their activities and tasks, and to ensure the application and implementation of this Regulation. The members of those authorities shall refrain from any action incompatible with their duties. Provided that those principles are observed, such activities and tasks may be performed by one or more designated authorities, in accordance with the organisational needs of the Member State. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 53 Obligations for providers of general-purpose AI models 1. Providers of general-purpose AI models shall: (a) draw up and keep up-to-date the technical documentation of the model, including its training and testing process and the results of its evaluation, which shall contain, at a minimum, the information set out in Annex XI for the purpose of providing it, upon request, to the AI Office and the national competent authorities; (b) draw up, keep up-to-date and make available information and documentation to providers of AI systems who intend to integrate the general-purpose AI model into their AI systems. Without prejudice to the need to observe and protect intellectual property rights and confidential business information or trade secrets in accordance with Union and national law, the information and documentation shall: (i) enable providers of AI systems to have a good understanding of the capabilities and limitations of the general-purpose AI model and to comply with their obligations pursuant to this Regulation; and (ii) contain, at a minimum, the elements set out in Annex XII; (c) put in place a policy to comply with Union law on copyright and related rights, and in particular to identify and comply with, including through state-of-the-art technologies, a reservation of rights expressed pursuant to Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 77(1). The relevant operators shall cooperate as necessary with the market surveillance authority and with the other national public authorities or bodies referred to in Article 77(1). Where, in the course of that evaluation, the market surveillance authority or, where applicable the market surveillance authority in cooperation with the national public authority referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 19 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, within seven days from the date it received the notification referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, and shall follow the notification procedures as provided in that Regulation. 9. For high-risk AI systems referred to in Annex III that are placed on the market or put into service by providers that are subject to Union legislative instruments laying down reporting obligations equivalent to those set out in this Regulation, the notification of serious incidents shall be limited to those referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 77(1), finds that the AI system does not comply with the requirements and obligations laid down in this Regulation, it shall without undue delay require the relevant operator to take all appropriate corrective actions to bring the AI system into compliance, to withdraw the AI system from the market, or to recall it within a period the market surveillance authority may prescribe, and in any event within the shorter of 15 working days, or as provided for in the relevant Union harmonisation legislation. The market surveillance authority shall inform the relevant notified body accordingly. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 17; (e) a description of the procedures in place to ensure that the quality management system remains adequate and effective; (f) a written declaration that the same application has not been lodged with any other notified body. 3.2. The quality management system shall be assessed by the notified body, which shall determine whether it satisfies the requirements referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 11; (b) the documentation concerning the quality management system referred to in Article 17; (c) the documentation concerning the changes approved by notified bodies, where applicable; (d) the decisions and other documents issued by the notified bodies, where applicable; (e) the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 71 has not been carried out; (f) where applicable, no authorised representative has been appointed; (g) technical documentation is not available. 2. Where the non-compliance referred to in paragraph 1 persists, the market surveillance authority of the Member State concerned shall take appropriate and proportionate measures to restrict or prohibit the high-risk AI system being made available on the market or to ensure that it is recalled or withdrawn from the market without delay. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 10 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012, the Commission shall issue, without undue delay, standardisation requests covering all requirements set out in Section 2 of this Chapter and, as applicable, standardisation requests covering obligations set out in Chapter V, Sections 2 and 3, of this Regulation. The standardisation request shall also ask for deliverables on reporting and documentation processes to improve AI systems’ resource performance, such as reducing the high-risk AI system’s consumption of energy and of other resources during its lifecycle, and on the energy-efficient development of general-purpose AI models. When preparing a standardisation request, the Commission shall consult the Board and relevant stakeholders, including the advisory forum. When issuing a standardisation request to European standardisation organisations, the Commission shall specify that standards have to be clear, consistent, including with the standards developed in the various sectors for products covered by the existing Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex I, and aiming to ensure that high-risk AI systems or general-purpose AI models placed on the market or put into service in the Union meet the relevant requirements or obligations laid down in this Regulation. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 48; (i) comply with the registration obligations referred to in Article 49(1); (j) take the necessary corrective actions and provide information as required in Article 20; (k) upon a reasoned request of a national competent authority, demonstrate the conformity of the high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Section 2; (l) ensure that the high-risk AI system complies with accessibility requirements in accordance with Directives (EU) 2016/2102 and (EU) 2019/882. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 31. Any valid document related to existing designations of the applicant notified body under any other Union harmonisation legislation shall be added. 3. Where the conformity assessment body concerned cannot provide an accreditation certificate, it shall provide the notifying authority with all the documentary evidence necessary for the verification, recognition and regular monitoring of its compliance with the requirements laid down in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 72 Post-market monitoring by providers and post-market monitoring plan for high-risk AI systems 1. Providers shall establish and document a post-market monitoring system in a manner that is proportionate to the nature of the AI technologies and the risks of the high-risk AI system. 2. The post-market monitoring system shall actively and systematically collect, document and analyse relevant data which may be provided by deployers or which may be collected through other sources on the performance of high-risk AI systems throughout their lifetime, and which allow the provider to evaluate the continuous compliance of AI systems with the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2. Where relevant, post-market monitoring shall include an analysis of the interaction with other AI systems. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 53(1), point (a) — technical documentation for providers of general-purpose AI models Section 1 Information to be provided by all providers of general-purpose AI models The technical documentation referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 112, including as regards the serious incident reports referred to in Article 73, and the functioning of the EU database referred to in Article 71, the preparation of the delegated or implementing acts, and as regards possible alignments of this Regulation with the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex I; (iii) on technical specifications or existing standards regarding the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2; (iv) on the use of harmonised standards or common specifications referred to in Articles 40 and 41; (v) trends, such as European global competitiveness in AI, the uptake of AI in the Union, and the development of digital skills; (vi) trends on the evolving typology of AI value chains, in particular on the resulting implications in terms of accountability; (vii) on the potential need for amendment to Annex III in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 92 Power to conduct evaluations 1. The AI Office, after consulting the Board, may conduct evaluations of the general-purpose AI model concerned: (a) to assess compliance of the provider with obligations under this Regulation, where the information gathered pursuant to Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 51(1), point (a), may present, with its notification, sufficiently substantiated arguments to demonstrate that, exceptionally, although it meets that requirement, the general-purpose AI model does not present, due to its specific characteristics, systemic risks and therefore should not be classified as a general-purpose AI model with systemic risk. 3. Where the Commission concludes that the arguments submitted pursuant to paragraph 2 are not sufficiently substantiated and the relevant provider was not able to demonstrate that the general-purpose AI model does not present, due to its specific characteristics, systemic risks, it shall reject those arguments, and the general-purpose AI model shall be considered to be a general-purpose AI model with systemic risk. 4. The Commission may designate a general-purpose AI model as presenting systemic risks, ex officio or following a qualified alert from the scientific panel pursuant to Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 31, and shall inform the notifying authority accordingly. 2. Notified bodies shall take full responsibility for the tasks performed by any subcontractors or subsidiaries. 3. Activities may be subcontracted or carried out by a subsidiary only with the agreement of the provider. Notified bodies shall make a list of their subsidiaries publicly available. 4. The relevant documents concerning the assessment of the qualifications of the subcontractor or the subsidiary and the work carried out by them under this Regulation shall be kept at the disposal of the notifying authority for a period of five years from the termination date of the subcontracting. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 47, the following paragraph is added: ‘3. When adopting delegated acts pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 concerning Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2024/1689, the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2, of that Regulation shall be taken into account.’ ; (5) in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 16; (b) obligations of authorised representatives pursuant to Article 22; (c) obligations of importers pursuant to Article 23; (d) obligations of distributors pursuant to Article 24; (e) obligations of deployers pursuant to Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 80 Procedure for dealing with AI systems classified by the provider as non-high-risk in application of Annex III 1. Where a market surveillance authority has sufficient reason to consider that an AI system classified by the provider as non-high-risk pursuant to Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 27 Fundamental rights impact assessment for high-risk AI systems 1. Prior to deploying a high-risk AI system referred to in Article 6(2), with the exception of high-risk AI systems intended to be used in the area listed in point 2 of Annex III, deployers that are bodies governed by public law, or are private entities providing public services, and deployers of high-risk AI systems referred to in points 5 (b) and (c) of Annex III, shall perform an assessment of the impact on fundamental rights that the use of such system may produce. For that purpose, deployers shall perform an assessment consisting of: (a) a description of the deployer’s processes in which the high-risk AI system will be used in line with its intended purpose; (b) a description of the period of time within which, and the frequency with which, each high-risk AI system is intended to be used; (c) the categories of natural persons and groups likely to be affected by its use in the specific context; (d) the specific risks of harm likely to have an impact on the categories of natural persons or groups of persons identified pursuant to point (c) of this paragraph, taking into account the information given by the provider pursuant to Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 81. 4. The experts on the scientific panel shall perform their tasks with impartiality and objectivity, and shall ensure the confidentiality of information and data obtained in carrying out their tasks and activities. They shall neither seek nor take instructions from anyone when exercising their tasks under paragraph 3. Each expert shall draw up a declaration of interests, which shall be made publicly available. The AI Office shall establish systems and procedures to actively manage and prevent potential conflicts of interest. 5. The implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 shall include provisions on the conditions, procedures and detailed arrangements for the scientific panel and its members to issue alerts, and to request the assistance of the AI Office for the performance of the tasks of the scientific panel. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 39 Conformity assessment bodies of third countries Conformity assessment bodies established under the law of a third country with which the Union has concluded an agreement may be authorised to carry out the activities of notified bodies under this Regulation, provided that they meet the requirements laid down in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 47. 2. Each Member State shall determine conditions under which the documentation referred to in paragraph 1 remains at the disposal of the national competent authorities for the period indicated in that paragraph for the cases when a provider or its authorised representative established on its territory goes bankrupt or ceases its activity prior to the end of that period. 3. Providers that are financial institutions subject to requirements regarding their internal governance, arrangements or processes under Union financial services law shall maintain the technical documentation as part of the documentation kept under the relevant Union financial services law. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 2(1) of this Regulation; (b) any reference to a product under Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall be understood as including all AI systems falling within the scope of this Regulation. 2. As part of their reporting obligations under Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 12(1), automatically generated by the high-risk AI system, to the extent such logs are under the control of the provider; (d) cooperate with competent authorities, upon a reasoned request, in any action the latter take in relation to the high-risk AI system, in particular to reduce and mitigate the risks posed by the high-risk AI system; (e) where applicable, comply with the registration obligations referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 9 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 for the processing of biometric data for purposes other than law enforcement. 2. The use of ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces for the purposes of law enforcement for any of the objectives referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (h), shall be deployed for the purposes set out in that point only to confirm the identity of the specifically targeted individual, and it shall take into account the following elements: (a) the nature of the situation giving rise to the possible use, in particular the seriousness, probability and scale of the harm that would be caused if the system were not used; (b) the consequences of the use of the system for the rights and freedoms of all persons concerned, in particular the seriousness, probability and scale of those consequences. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 39 of the Charter, and of adverse effects on democracy and the rule of law, AI systems intended to be used to influence the outcome of an election or referendum or the voting behaviour of natural persons in the exercise of their vote in elections or referenda should be classified as high-risk AI systems with the exception of AI systems whose output natural persons are not directly exposed to, such as tools used to organise, optimise and structure political campaigns from an administrative and logistical point of view. (63) The fact that an AI system is classified as a high-risk AI system under this Regulation should not be interpreted as indicating that the use of the system is lawful under other acts of Union law or under national law compatible with Union law, such as on the protection of personal data, on the use of polygraphs and similar tools or other systems to detect the emotional state of natural persons. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 14, including an assessment of the technical measures needed to facilitate the interpretation of the outputs of AI systems by the deployers, in accordance with Article 13(3), point (d); (f) where applicable, a detailed description of pre-determined changes to the AI system and its performance, together with all the relevant information related to the technical solutions adopted to ensure continuous compliance of the AI system with the relevant requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2; (g) the validation and testing procedures used, including information about the validation and testing data used and their main characteristics; metrics used to measure accuracy, robustness and compliance with other relevant requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2, as well as potentially discriminatory impacts; test logs and all test reports dated and signed by the responsible persons, including with regard to pre-determined changes as referred to under point (f); (h) cybersecurity measures put in place; 3. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 101 for failure to provide access. 5. The providers of the general-purpose AI model concerned or its representative shall supply the information requested. In the case of legal persons, companies or firms, or where the provider has no legal personality, the persons authorised to represent them by law or by their statutes, shall provide the access requested on behalf of the provider of the general-purpose AI model concerned. 6. The Commission shall adopt implementing acts setting out the detailed arrangements and the conditions for the evaluations, including the detailed arrangements for involving independent experts, and the procedure for the selection thereof. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 2, point (4) of Directive (EU) 2022/2557 of the European Parliament and of the Council (19), where the disruption or destruction of such critical infrastructure would result in an imminent threat to life or the physical safety of a person, including through serious harm to the provision of basic supplies to the population or to the exercise of the core function of the State. In addition, this Regulation should preserve the ability for law enforcement, border control, immigration or asylum authorities to carry out identity checks in the presence of the person concerned in accordance with the conditions set out in Union and national law for such checks. In particular, law enforcement, border control, immigration or asylum authorities should be able to use information systems, in accordance with Union or national law, to identify persons who, during an identity check, either refuse to be identified or are unable to state or prove their identity, without being required by this Regulation to obtain prior authorisation. This could be, for example, a person involved in a crime, being unwilling, or unable due to an accident or a medical condition, to disclose their identity to law enforcement authorities. (34) In order to ensure that those systems are used in a responsible and proportionate manner, it is also important to establish that, in each of those exhaustively listed and narrowly defined situations, certain elements should be taken into account, in particular as regards the nature of the situation giving rise to the request and the consequences of the use for the rights and freedoms of all persons concerned and the safeguards and conditions provided for with the use. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 25; (b) the prohibited practices referred to in Article 5; (c) the practical implementation of the provisions related to substantial modification; (d) the practical implementation of transparency obligations laid down in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 4(2) TEU and by the specificities of the Member States’ and the common Union defence policy covered by Chapter 2 of Title V TEU that are subject to public international law, which is therefore the more appropriate legal framework for the regulation of AI systems in the context of the use of lethal force and other AI systems in the context of military and defence activities. As regards national security purposes, the exclusion is justified both by the fact that national security remains the sole responsibility of Member States in accordance with Article 4(2) TEU and by the specific nature and operational needs of national security activities and specific national rules applicable to those activities. Nonetheless, if an AI system developed, placed on the market, put into service or used for military, defence or national security purposes is used outside those temporarily or permanently for other purposes, for example, civilian or humanitarian purposes, law enforcement or public security purposes, such a system would fall within the scope of this Regulation. In that case, the entity using the AI system for other than military, defence or national security purposes should ensure the compliance of the AI system with this Regulation, unless the system is already compliant with this Regulation. AI systems placed on the market or put into service for an excluded purpose, namely military, defence or national security, and one or more non-excluded purposes, such as civilian purposes or law enforcement, fall within the scope of this Regulation and providers of those systems should ensure compliance with this Regulation. In those cases, the fact that an AI system may fall within the scope of this Regulation should not affect the possibility of entities carrying out national security, defence and military activities, regardless of the type of entity carrying out those activities, to use AI systems for national security, military and defence purposes, the use of which is excluded from the scope of this Regulation. An AI system placed on the market for civilian or law enforcement purposes which is used with or without modification for military, defence or national security purposes should not fall within the scope of this Regulation, regardless of the type of entity carrying out those activities. (25) This Regulation should support innovation, should respect freedom of science, and should not undermine research and development activity. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 6(4) and Article 9(2), point (g), of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, and Articles 5, 6 and 10 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725, and without prejudice to Article 4(2) and Article 10 of Directive (EU) 2016/680. All other obligations of data controllers and rights of data subjects under Regulations (EU) 2016/679 and (EU) 2018/1725 and Directive (EU) 2016/680 remain applicable. In particular, this Regulation should not provide a legal basis in the meaning of Article 22(2), point (b) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and Article 24(2), point (b) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725. Providers and prospective providers in the AI regulatory sandbox should ensure appropriate safeguards and cooperate with the competent authorities, including by following their guidance and acting expeditiously and in good faith to adequately mitigate any identified significant risks to safety, health, and fundamental rights that may arise during the development, testing and experimentation in that sandbox. (141) In order to accelerate the process of development and the placing on the market of the high-risk AI systems listed in an annex to this Regulation, it is important that providers or prospective providers of such systems may also benefit from a specific regime for testing those systems in real world conditions, without participating in an AI regulatory sandbox. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 9 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and Article 10 of Directive (EU) 2016/680 for the processing of biometric data. Regardless of the purpose or deployer, each use of such high-risk AI systems shall be documented in the relevant police file and shall be made available to the relevant market surveillance authority and the national data protection authority upon request, excluding the disclosure of sensitive operational data related to law enforcement. This subparagraph shall be without prejudice to the powers conferred by Directive (EU) 2016/680 on supervisory authorities. Deployers shall submit annual reports to the relevant market surveillance and national data protection authorities on their use of post-remote biometric identification systems, excluding the disclosure of sensitive operational data related to law enforcement. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 92 has given rise to serious and substantiated concern of a systemic risk at Union level; (c) restrict the making available on the market, withdraw or recall the model. 2. Before a measure is requested, the AI Office may initiate a structured dialogue with the provider of the general-purpose AI model. 3. If, during the structured dialogue referred to in paragraph 2, the provider of the general-purpose AI model with systemic risk offers commitments to implement mitigation measures to address a systemic risk at Union level, the Commission may, by decision, make those commitments binding and declare that there are no further grounds for action. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 101 Fines for providers of general-purpose AI models 1. The Commission may impose on providers of general-purpose AI models fines not exceeding 3 % of their annual total worldwide turnover in the preceding financial year or EUR 15 000 000, whichever is higher., when the Commission finds that the provider intentionally or negligently: (a) infringed the relevant provisions of this Regulation; (b) failed to comply with a request for a document or for information pursuant to Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 78 shall apply from 2 August 2025, with the exception of Article 101; (c) Article 6(1) and the corresponding obligations in this Regulation shall apply from 2 August 2027. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 13 June 2024. For the European Parliament The President R. METSOLA For the Council The President M. MICHEL (1) OJ C 517, 22.12.2021, p. 56. (2) OJ C 115, 11.3.2022, p. 5. (3) OJ C 97, 28.2.2022, p. 60. (4) Position of the European Parliament of 13 March 2024 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of 21 May 2024. (5) European Council, Special meeting of the European Council (1 and 2 October 2020) — Conclusions, EUCO 13/20, 2020, p. 6. (6) European Parliament resolution of 20 October 2020 with recommendations to the Commission on a framework of ethical aspects of artificial intelligence, robotics and related technologies, 2020/2012(INL). Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 72; (d) the adoption of appropriate and targeted risk management measures designed to address the risks identified pursuant to point (a). 3. The risks referred to in this Article shall concern only those which may be reasonably mitigated or eliminated through the development or design of the high-risk AI system, or the provision of adequate technical information. 4. The risk management measures referred to in paragraph 2, point (d), shall give due consideration to the effects and possible interaction resulting from the combined application of the requirements set out in this Section, with a view to minimising risks more effectively while achieving an appropriate balance in implementing the measures to fulfil those requirements. 5. The risk management measures referred to in paragraph 2, point (d), shall be such that the relevant residual risk associated with each hazard, as well as the overall residual risk of the high-risk AI systems is judged to be acceptable. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 43, the following paragraph is added: ‘4. When adopting implementing acts pursuant to paragraph 1 concerning Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2024/1689, the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2, of that Regulation shall be taken into account.’ ; (4) in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 66 Tasks of the Board The Board shall advise and assist the Commission and the Member States in order to facilitate the consistent and effective application of this Regulation. To that end, the Board may in particular: (a) contribute to the coordination among national competent authorities responsible for the application of this Regulation and, in cooperation with and subject to the agreement of the market surveillance authorities concerned, support joint activities of market surveillance authorities referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 35 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and in Article 39 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725, may arise during the sandbox experimentation, as well as response mechanisms to promptly mitigate those risks and, where necessary, stop the processing; (d) any personal data to be processed in the context of the sandbox are in a functionally separate, isolated and protected data processing environment under the control of the prospective provider and only authorised persons have access to those data; (e) providers can further share the originally collected data only in accordance with Union data protection law; any personal data created in the sandbox cannot be shared outside the sandbox; (f) any processing of personal data in the context of the sandbox neither leads to measures or decisions affecting the data subjects nor does it affect the application of their rights laid down in Union law on the protection of personal data; (g) any personal data processed in the context of the sandbox are protected by means of appropriate technical and organisational measures and deleted once the participation in the sandbox has terminated or the personal data has reached the end of its retention period; (h) the logs of the processing of personal data in the context of the sandbox are kept for the duration of the participation in the sandbox, unless provided otherwise by Union or national law; (i) a complete and detailed description of the process and rationale behind the training, testing and validation of the AI system is kept together with the testing results as part of the technical documentation referred to in Annex IV; (j) a short summary of the AI project developed in the sandbox, its objectives and expected results is published on the website of the competent authorities; this obligation shall not cover sensitive operational data in relation to the activities of law enforcement, border control, immigration or asylum authorities. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 71 EU database for high-risk AI systems listed in Annex III 1. The Commission shall, in collaboration with the Member States, set up and maintain an EU database containing information referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article concerning high-risk AI systems referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 71(4) with a Union-wide unique single identification number and with the information specified in Annex IX; the provider or prospective provider of high-risk AI systems referred to in points 1, 6 and 7 of Annex III in the areas of law enforcement, migration, asylum and border control management, has registered the testing in real-world conditions in the secure non-public section of the EU database according to Article 49(4), point (d), with a Union-wide unique single identification number and with the information specified therein; the provider or prospective provider of high-risk AI systems referred to in point 2 of Annex III has registered the testing in real-world conditions in accordance with Article 49(5); (d) the provider or prospective provider conducting the testing in real world conditions is established in the Union or has appointed a legal representative who is established in the Union; (e) data collected and processed for the purpose of the testing in real world conditions shall be transferred to third countries only provided that appropriate and applicable safeguards under Union law are implemented; (f) the testing in real world conditions does not last longer than necessary to achieve its objectives and in any case not longer than six months, which may be extended for an additional period of six months, subject to prior notification by the provider or prospective provider to the market surveillance authority, accompanied by an explanation of the need for such an extension; (g) the subjects of the testing in real world conditions who are persons belonging to vulnerable groups due to their age or disability, are appropriately protected; (h) where a provider or prospective provider organises the testing in real world conditions in cooperation with one or more deployers or prospective deployers, the latter have been informed of all aspects of the testing that are relevant to their decision to participate, and given the relevant instructions for use of the AI system referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 58, the market surveillance authorities shall verify the compliance with Article 60 as part of their supervisory role for the AI regulatory sandbox. Those authorities may, as appropriate, allow the testing in real world conditions to be conducted by the provider or prospective provider, in derogation from the conditions set out in Article 60(4), points (f) and (g). 3. Where a market surveillance authority has been informed by the prospective provider, the provider or any third party of a serious incident or has other grounds for considering that the conditions set out in Articles 60 and 61 are not met, it may take either of the following decisions on its territory, as appropriate: (a) to suspend or terminate the testing in real world conditions; (b) to require the provider or prospective provider and the deployer or prospective deployer to modify any aspect of the testing in real world conditions. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 4(3) of Directive (EU) 2019/790. Any provider placing a general-purpose AI model on the Union market should comply with this obligation, regardless of the jurisdiction in which the copyright-relevant acts underpinning the training of those general-purpose AI models take place. This is necessary to ensure a level playing field among providers of general-purpose AI models where no provider should be able to gain a competitive advantage in the Union market by applying lower copyright standards than those provided in the Union. (107) In order to increase transparency on the data that is used in the pre-training and training of general-purpose AI models, including text and data protected by copyright law, it is adequate that providers of such models draw up and make publicly available a sufficiently detailed summary of the content used for training the general-purpose AI model. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 83 Formal non-compliance 1. Where the market surveillance authority of a Member State makes one of the following findings, it shall require the relevant provider to put an end to the non-compliance concerned, within a period it may prescribe: (a) the CE marking has been affixed in violation of Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 85 Right to lodge a complaint with a market surveillance authority Without prejudice to other administrative or judicial remedies, any natural or legal person having grounds to consider that there has been an infringement of the provisions of this Regulation may submit complaints to the relevant market surveillance authority. In accordance with Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, such complaints shall be taken into account for the purpose of conducting market surveillance activities, and shall be handled in line with the dedicated procedures established therefor by the market surveillance authorities. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 79(1) and the provider becomes aware of that risk, it shall immediately investigate the causes, in collaboration with the reporting deployer, where applicable, and inform the market surveillance authorities competent for the high-risk AI system concerned and, where applicable, the notified body that issued a certificate for that high-risk AI system in accordance with Article 44, in particular, of the nature of the non-compliance and of any relevant corrective action taken. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 53(1), points (a) and (b), is kept up to date in light of market and technological developments; (b) the adequate level of detail for the summary about the content used for training; (c) the identification of the type and nature of the systemic risks at Union level, including their sources, where appropriate; (d) the measures, procedures and modalities for the assessment and management of the systemic risks at Union level, including the documentation thereof, which shall be proportionate to the risks, take into consideration their severity and probability and take into account the specific challenges of tackling those risks in light of the possible ways in which such risks may emerge and materialise along the AI value chain. 3. The AI Office may invite all providers of general-purpose AI models, as well as relevant national competent authorities, to participate in the drawing-up of codes of practice. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 5 shall be subject to administrative fines of up to EUR 35 000 000 or, if the offender is an undertaking, up to 7 % of its total worldwide annual turnover for the preceding financial year, whichever is higher. 4. Non-compliance with any of the following provisions related to operators or notified bodies, other than those laid down in Articles 5, shall be subject to administrative fines of up to EUR 15 000 000 or, if the offender is an undertaking, up to 3 % of its total worldwide annual turnover for the preceding financial year, whichever is higher: (a) obligations of providers pursuant to Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 94 Procedural rights of economic operators of the general-purpose AI model Article 18 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the providers of the general-purpose AI model, without prejudice to more specific procedural rights provided for in this Regulation. CHAPTER X CODES OF CONDUCT AND GUIDELINES Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 79(5) to (9) shall apply. 7. Where, in the course of the evaluation pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, the market surveillance authority establishes that the AI system was misclassified by the provider as non-high-risk in order to circumvent the application of requirements in Chapter III, Section 2, the provider shall be subject to fines in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 2, point (4), of Directive (EU) 2022/2557; (63) ‘general-purpose AI model’ means an AI model, including where such an AI model is trained with a large amount of data using self-supervision at scale, that displays significant generality and is capable of competently performing a wide range of distinct tasks regardless of the way the model is placed on the market and that can be integrated into a variety of downstream systems or applications, except AI models that are used for research, development or prototyping activities before they are placed on the market; (64) ‘high-impact capabilities’ means capabilities that match or exceed the capabilities recorded in the most advanced general-purpose AI models; (65) ‘systemic risk’ means a risk that is specific to the high-impact capabilities of general-purpose AI models, having a significant impact on the Union market due to their reach, or due to actual or reasonably foreseeable negative effects on public health, safety, public security, fundamental rights, or the society as a whole, that can be propagated at scale across the value chain; (66) ‘general-purpose AI system’ means an AI system which is based on a general-purpose AI model and which has the capability to serve a variety of purposes, both for direct use as well as for integration in other AI systems; (67) ‘floating-point operation’ means any mathematical operation or assignment involving floating-point numbers, which are a subset of the real numbers typically represented on computers by an integer of fixed precision scaled by an integer exponent of a fixed base; (68) ‘downstream provider’ means a provider of an AI system, including a general-purpose AI system, which integrates an AI model, regardless of whether the AI model is provided by themselves and vertically integrated or provided by another entity based on contractual relations. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 6(3) is indeed high-risk, the market surveillance authority shall carry out an evaluation of the AI system concerned in respect of its classification as a high-risk AI system based on the conditions set out in Article 6(3) and the Commission guidelines. 2. Where, in the course of that evaluation, the market surveillance authority finds that the AI system concerned is high-risk, it shall without undue delay require the relevant provider to take all necessary actions to bring the AI system into compliance with the requirements and obligations laid down in this Regulation, as well as take appropriate corrective action within a period the market surveillance authority may prescribe. 3. Where the market surveillance authority considers that the use of the AI system concerned is not restricted to its national territory, it shall inform the Commission and the other Member States without undue delay of the results of the evaluation and of the actions which it has required the provider to take. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 57 or 60 are fulfilled; (58) ‘subject’, for the purpose of real-world testing, means a natural person who participates in testing in real-world conditions; (59) ‘informed consent’ means a subject’s freely given, specific, unambiguous and voluntary expression of his or her willingness to participate in a particular testing in real-world conditions, after having been informed of all aspects of the testing that are relevant to the subject’s decision to participate; (60) ‘deep fake’ means AI-generated or manipulated image, audio or video content that resembles existing persons, objects, places, entities or events and would falsely appear to a person to be authentic or truthful; (61) ‘widespread infringement’ means any act or omission contrary to Union law protecting the interest of individuals, which: (a) has harmed or is likely to harm the collective interests of individuals residing in at least two Member States other than the Member State in which: (i) the act or omission originated or took place; (ii) the provider concerned, or, where applicable, its authorised representative is located or established; or (iii) the deployer is established, when the infringement is committed by the deployer; (b) has caused, causes or is likely to cause harm to the collective interests of individuals and has common features, including the same unlawful practice or the same interest being infringed, and is occurring concurrently, committed by the same operator, in at least three Member States; (62) ‘critical infrastructure’ means critical infrastructure as defined in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 30 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020. In accordance with Article 33 of that Regulation, the Commission should support the activities of the standing subgroup for market surveillance by undertaking market evaluations or studies, in particular with a view to identifying aspects of this Regulation requiring specific and urgent coordination among market surveillance authorities. The Board may establish other standing or temporary sub-groups as appropriate for the purpose of examining specific issues. The Board should also cooperate, as appropriate, with relevant Union bodies, experts groups and networks active in the context of relevant Union law, including in particular those active under relevant Union law on data, digital products and services. (150) With a view to ensuring the involvement of stakeholders in the implementation and application of this Regulation, an advisory forum should be established to advise and provide technical expertise to the Board and the Commission. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 106 Amendment to Directive (EU) 2016/797 In Article 5 of Directive (EU) 2016/797, the following paragraph is added: ‘12. When adopting delegated acts pursuant to paragraph 1 and implementing acts pursuant to paragraph 11 concerning Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*), the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2, of that Regulation shall be taken into account. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 49 Registration 1. Before placing on the market or putting into service a high-risk AI system listed in Annex III, with the exception of high-risk AI systems referred to in point 2 of Annex III, the provider or, where applicable, the authorised representative shall register themselves and their system in the EU database referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 62 Measures for providers and deployers, in particular SMEs, including start-ups 1. Member States shall undertake the following actions: (a) provide SMEs, including start-ups, having a registered office or a branch in the Union, with priority access to the AI regulatory sandboxes, to the extent that they fulfil the eligibility conditions and selection criteria; the priority access shall not preclude other SMEs, including start-ups, other than those referred to in this paragraph from access to the AI regulatory sandbox, provided that they also fulfil the eligibility conditions and selection criteria; (b) organise specific awareness raising and training activities on the application of this Regulation tailored to the needs of SMEs including start-ups, deployers and, as appropriate, local public authorities; (c) utilise existing dedicated channels and where appropriate, establish new ones for communication with SMEs including start-ups, deployers, other innovators and, as appropriate, local public authorities to provide advice and respond to queries about the implementation of this Regulation, including as regards participation in AI regulatory sandboxes; (d) facilitate the participation of SMEs and other relevant stakeholders in the standardisation development process. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 53 and, where applicable, Article 55 have been fulfilled by the provider; (b) keep a copy of the technical documentation specified in Annex XI at the disposal of the AI Office and national competent authorities, for a period of 10 years after the general-purpose AI model has been placed on the market, and the contact details of the provider that appointed the authorised representative; (c) provide the AI Office, upon a reasoned request, with all the information and documentation, including that referred to in point (b), necessary to demonstrate compliance with the obligations in this Chapter; (d) cooperate with the AI Office and competent authorities, upon a reasoned request, in any action they take in relation to the general-purpose AI model, including when the model is integrated into AI systems placed on the market or put into service in the Union. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 51 For the purpose of determining that a general-purpose AI model has capabilities or an impact equivalent to those set out in Article 51(1), point (a), the Commission shall take into account the following criteria: (a) the number of parameters of the model; (b) the quality or size of the data set, for example measured through tokens; (c) the amount of computation used for training the model, measured in floating point operations or indicated by a combination of other variables such as estimated cost of training, estimated time required for the training, or estimated energy consumption for the training; (d) the input and output modalities of the model, such as text to text (large language models), text to image, multi-modality, and the state of the art thresholds for determining high-impact capabilities for each modality, and the specific type of inputs and outputs (e.g. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 14, including the technical measures put in place to facilitate the interpretation of the outputs of AI systems by the deployers; specifications on input data, as appropriate; 4. A description of the appropriateness of the performance metrics for the specific AI system; 5. A detailed description of the risk management system in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 98(2). Article 38 Coordination of notified bodies 1. The Commission shall ensure that, with regard to high-risk AI systems, appropriate coordination and cooperation between notified bodies active in the conformity assessment procedures pursuant to this Regulation are put in place and properly operated in the form of a sectoral group of notified bodies. 2. Each notifying authority shall ensure that the bodies notified by it participate in the work of a group referred to in paragraph 1, directly or through designated representatives. 3. The Commission shall provide for the exchange of knowledge and best practices between notifying authorities. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 91 is insufficient; or (b) to investigate systemic risks at Union level of general-purpose AI models with systemic risk, in particular following a qualified alert from the scientific panel in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 48 CE marking 1. The CE marking shall be subject to the general principles set out in Article 30 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008. 2. For high-risk AI systems provided digitally, a digital CE marking shall be used, only if it can easily be accessed via the interface from which that system is accessed or via an easily accessible machine-readable code or other electronic means. 3. The CE marking shall be affixed visibly, legibly and indelibly for high-risk AI systems. Where that is not possible or not warranted on account of the nature of the high-risk AI system, it shall be affixed to the packaging or to the accompanying documentation, as appropriate. 4. Where applicable, the CE marking shall be followed by the identification number of the notified body responsible for the conformity assessment procedures set out in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 92. In fixing the amount of the fine or periodic penalty payment, regard shall be had to the nature, gravity and duration of the infringement, taking due account of the principles of proportionality and appropriateness. The Commission shall also into account commitments made in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 6; (c) they modify the intended purpose of an AI system, including a general-purpose AI system, which has not been classified as high-risk and has already been placed on the market or put into service in such a way that the AI system concerned becomes a high-risk AI system in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 2, point (1)(c), of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (41), which are normally expected to reflect the state of the art, should be a means for providers to demonstrate conformity with the requirements of this Regulation. A balanced representation of interests involving all relevant stakeholders in the development of standards, in particular SMEs, consumer organisations and environmental and social stakeholders in accordance with Articles 5 and 6 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 should therefore be encouraged. In order to facilitate compliance, the standardisation requests should be issued by the Commission without undue delay. When preparing the standardisation request, the Commission should consult the advisory forum and the Board in order to collect relevant expertise. However, in the absence of relevant references to harmonised standards, the Commission should be able to establish, via implementing acts, and after consultation of the advisory forum, common specifications for certain requirements under this Regulation. The common specification should be an exceptional fall back solution to facilitate the provider’s obligation to comply with the requirements of this Regulation, when the standardisation request has not been accepted by any of the European standardisation organisations, or when the relevant harmonised standards insufficiently address fundamental rights concerns, or when the harmonised standards do not comply with the request, or when there are delays in the adoption of an appropriate harmonised standard. Where such a delay in the adoption of a harmonised standard is due to the technical complexity of that standard, this should be considered by the Commission before contemplating the establishment of common specifications. When developing common specifications, the Commission is encouraged to cooperate with international partners and international standardisation bodies. (122) It is appropriate that, without prejudice to the use of harmonised standards and common specifications, providers of a high-risk AI system that has been trained and tested on data reflecting the specific geographical, behavioural, contextual or functional setting within which the AI system is intended to be used, should be presumed to comply with the relevant measure provided for under the requirement on data governance set out in this Regulation. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 47; 9. A detailed description of the system in place to evaluate the AI system performance in the post-market phase in accordance with Article 72, including the post-market monitoring plan referred to in Article 72(3). ANNEX V EU declaration of conformity The EU declaration of conformity referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 6(2) which are registered in accordance with Articles 49 and 60 and AI systems that are not considered as high-risk pursuant to Article 6(3) and which are registered in accordance with Article 6(4) and Article 49. When setting the functional specifications of such database, the Commission shall consult the relevant experts, and when updating the functional specifications of such database, the Commission shall consult the Board. 2. The data listed in Sections A and B of Annex VIII shall be entered into the EU database by the provider or, where applicable, by the authorised representative. 3. The data listed in Section C of Annex VIII shall be entered into the EU database by the deployer who is, or who acts on behalf of, a public authority, agency or body, in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 67 Advisory forum 1. An advisory forum shall be established to provide technical expertise and advise the Board and the Commission, and to contribute to their tasks under this Regulation. 2. The membership of the advisory forum shall represent a balanced selection of stakeholders, including industry, start-ups, SMEs, civil society and academia. The membership of the advisory forum shall be balanced with regard to commercial and non-commercial interests and, within the category of commercial interests, with regard to SMEs and other undertakings. 3. The Commission shall appoint the members of the advisory forum, in accordance with the criteria set out in paragraph 2, from amongst stakeholders with recognised expertise in the field of AI. 4. The term of office of the members of the advisory forum shall be two years, which may be extended by up to no more than four years. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 16(2) of Regulation (EU) 2017/745, establishing that certain changes should not be considered to be modifications of a device that could affect its compliance with the applicable requirements, should continue to apply to high-risk AI systems that are medical devices within the meaning of that Regulation. (85) General-purpose AI systems may be used as high-risk AI systems by themselves or be components of other high-risk AI systems. Therefore, due to their particular nature and in order to ensure a fair sharing of responsibilities along the AI value chain, the providers of such systems should, irrespective of whether they may be used as high-risk AI systems as such by other providers or as components of high-risk AI systems and unless provided otherwise under this Regulation, closely cooperate with the providers of the relevant high-risk AI systems to enable their compliance with the relevant obligations under this Regulation and with the competent authorities established under this Regulation. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 2 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU), the fundamental rights and freedoms enshrined in the Treaties and, pursuant to Article 6 TEU, the Charter. As a prerequisite, AI should be a human-centric technology. It should serve as a tool for people, with the ultimate aim of increasing human well-being. (7) In order to ensure a consistent and high level of protection of public interests as regards health, safety and fundamental rights, common rules for high-risk AI systems should be established. Those rules should be consistent with the Charter, non-discriminatory and in line with the Union’s international trade commitments. They should also take into account the European Declaration on Digital Rights and Principles for the Digital Decade and the Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI of the High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence (AI HLEG). Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 40 shall be taken into account. Article 18 Documentation keeping 1. The provider shall, for a period ending 10 years after the high-risk AI system has been placed on the market or put into service, keep at the disposal of the national competent authorities: (a) the technical documentation referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 7, and on the potential need for possible revision of Article 5 pursuant to Article 112, taking into account relevant available evidence and the latest developments in technology; (f) support the Commission in promoting AI literacy, public awareness and understanding of the benefits, risks, safeguards and rights and obligations in relation to the use of AI systems; (g) facilitate the development of common criteria and a shared understanding among market operators and competent authorities of the relevant concepts provided for in this Regulation, including by contributing to the development of benchmarks; (h) cooperate, as appropriate, with other Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies, as well as relevant Union expert groups and networks, in particular in the fields of product safety, cybersecurity, competition, digital and media services, financial services, consumer protection, data and fundamental rights protection; (i) contribute to effective cooperation with the competent authorities of third countries and with international organisations; (j) assist national competent authorities and the Commission in developing the organisational and technical expertise required for the implementation of this Regulation, including by contributing to the assessment of training needs for staff of Member States involved in implementing this Regulation; (k) assist the AI Office in supporting national competent authorities in the establishment and development of AI regulatory sandboxes, and facilitate cooperation and information-sharing among AI regulatory sandboxes; (l) contribute to, and provide relevant advice on, the development of guidance documents; (m) advise the Commission in relation to international matters on AI; (n) provide opinions to the Commission on the qualified alerts regarding general-purpose AI models; (o) receive opinions by the Member States on qualified alerts regarding general-purpose AI models, and on national experiences and practices on the monitoring and enforcement of AI systems, in particular systems integrating the general-purpose AI models. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 98 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by a committee. That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011. 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 79(1), the distributor shall immediately inform the provider or importer of the system and the authorities competent for the high-risk AI system concerned, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective actions taken. 5. Upon a reasoned request from a relevant competent authority, distributors of a high-risk AI system shall provide that authority with all the information and documentation regarding their actions pursuant to paragraphs 1 to 4 necessary to demonstrate the conformity of that system with the requirements set out in Section 2. 6. Distributors shall cooperate with the relevant competent authorities in any action those authorities take in relation to a high-risk AI system made available on the market by the distributors, in particular to reduce or mitigate the risk posed by it. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 43(4) or whether they could be addressed by means of a supplement to the Union technical documentation assessment certificate. In the latter case, the notified body shall assess the changes, notify the provider of its decision and, where the changes are approved, issue to the provider a supplement to the Union technical documentation assessment certificate. 5. Surveillance of the approved quality management system. 5.1. The purpose of the surveillance carried out by the notified body referred to in Point 3 is to make sure that the provider duly complies with the terms and conditions of the approved quality management system. 5.2. For assessment purposes, the provider shall allow the notified body to access the premises where the design, development, testing of the AI systems is taking place. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 23 Obligations of importers 1. Before placing a high-risk AI system on the market, importers shall ensure that the system is in conformity with this Regulation by verifying that: (a) the relevant conformity assessment procedure referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 78, the confidentiality of the information which comes into their possession during the performance of conformity assessment activities, except when its disclosure is required by law. The staff of notified bodies shall be bound to observe professional secrecy with regard to all information obtained in carrying out their tasks under this Regulation, except in relation to the notifying authorities of the Member State in which their activities are carried out. 8. Notified bodies shall have procedures for the performance of activities which take due account of the size of a provider, the sector in which it operates, its structure, and the degree of complexity of the AI system concerned. 9. Notified bodies shall take out appropriate liability insurance for their conformity assessment activities, unless liability is assumed by the Member State in which they are established in accordance with national law or that Member State is itself directly responsible for the conformity assessment. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 9 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020. The AI Office shall provide coordination support for joint investigations. 12. Without prejudice to the powers provided for under Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, and where relevant and limited to what is necessary to fulfil their tasks, the market surveillance authorities shall be granted full access by providers to the documentation as well as the training, validation and testing data sets used for the development of high-risk AI systems, including, where appropriate and subject to security safeguards, through application programming interfaces (API) or other relevant technical means and tools enabling remote access. 13. Market surveillance authorities shall be granted access to the source code of the high-risk AI system upon a reasoned request and only when both of the following conditions are fulfilled: (a) access to source code is necessary to assess the conformity of a high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2; and (b) testing or auditing procedures and verifications based on the data and documentation provided by the provider have been exhausted or proved insufficient. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 93(3) or made in relevant codes of practice in accordance with Article 56. 2. Before adopting the decision pursuant to paragraph 1, the Commission shall communicate its preliminary findings to the provider of the general-purpose AI model and give it an opportunity to be heard. 3. Fines imposed in accordance with this Article shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. 4. Information on fines imposed under this Article shall also be communicated to the Board as appropriate. 5. The Court of Justice of the European Union shall have unlimited jurisdiction to review decisions of the Commission fixing a fine under this Article. It may cancel, reduce or increase the fine imposed. 6. The Commission shall adopt implementing acts containing detailed arrangements and procedural safeguards for proceedings in view of the possible adoption of decisions pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 50 Transparency obligations for providers and deployers of certain AI systems 1. Providers shall ensure that AI systems intended to interact directly with natural persons are designed and developed in such a way that the natural persons concerned are informed that they are interacting with an AI system, unless this is obvious from the point of view of a natural person who is reasonably well-informed, observant and circumspect, taking into account the circumstances and the context of use. This obligation shall not apply to AI systems authorised by law to detect, prevent, investigate or prosecute criminal offences, subject to appropriate safeguards for the rights and freedoms of third parties, unless those systems are available for the public to report a criminal offence. 2. Providers of AI systems, including general-purpose AI systems, generating synthetic audio, image, video or text content, shall ensure that the outputs of the AI system are marked in a machine-readable format and detectable as artificially generated or manipulated. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 47, shall contain all of the following information: 1. AI system name and type and any additional unambiguous reference allowing the identification and traceability of the AI system; 2. The name and address of the provider or, where applicable, of their authorised representative; 3. A statement that the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 10 of Directive (EU) 2016/680. For purposes other than law enforcement, Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and Article 10(1) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 prohibit the processing of biometric data subject to limited exceptions as provided in those Articles. In the application of Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, the use of remote biometric identification for purposes other than law enforcement has already been subject to prohibition decisions by national data protection authorities. (40) In accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 97 Exercise of the delegation 1. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article. 2. The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 4, point (4) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 or Article 3, point (4) of Directive (EU) 2016/680 or Article 3, point (5) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725. To ensure traceability and transparency, a provider who considers that an AI system is not high-risk on the basis of the conditions referred to above should draw up documentation of the assessment before that system is placed on the market or put into service and should provide that documentation to national competent authorities upon request. Such a provider should be obliged to register the AI system in the EU database established under this Regulation. With a view to providing further guidance for the practical implementation of the conditions under which the AI systems listed in an annex to this Regulation are, on an exceptional basis, non-high-risk, the Commission should, after consulting the Board, provide guidelines specifying that practical implementation, completed by a comprehensive list of practical examples of use cases of AI systems that are high-risk and use cases that are not. (54) As biometric data constitutes a special category of personal data, it is appropriate to classify as high-risk several critical-use cases of biometric systems, insofar as their use is permitted under relevant Union and national law. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 56 to demonstrate compliance with the obligations set out in paragraph 1 of this Article, until a harmonised standard is published. Compliance with European harmonised standards grants providers the presumption of conformity to the extent that those standards cover those obligations. Providers of general-purpose AI models with systemic risks who do not adhere to an approved code of practice or do not comply with a European harmonised standard shall demonstrate alternative adequate means of compliance for assessment by the Commission. 3. Any information or documentation obtained pursuant to this Article, including trade secrets, shall be treated in accordance with the confidentiality obligations set out in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 22 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 that it considers the conditions laid down in paragraph 1 of this Article to be fulfilled. 3. High-risk AI systems or general-purpose AI models which are in conformity with the common specifications referred to in paragraph 1, or parts of those specifications, shall be presumed to be in conformity with the requirements set out in Section 2 of this Chapter or, as applicable, to comply with the obligations referred to in Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter V, to the extent those common specifications cover those requirements or those obligations. 4. Where a harmonised standard is adopted by a European standardisation organisation and proposed to the Commission for the publication of its reference in the Official Journal of the European Union, the Commission shall assess the harmonised standard in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 40 do not exist, and common specifications referred to in Article 41 are not available; (b) the provider has not applied, or has applied only part of, the harmonised standard; (c) the common specifications referred to in point (a) exist, but the provider has not applied them; (d) one or more of the harmonised standards referred to in point (a) has been published with a restriction, and only on the part of the standard that was restricted. For the purposes of the conformity assessment procedure referred to in Annex VII, the provider may choose any of the notified bodies. However, where the high-risk AI system is intended to be put into service by law enforcement, immigration or asylum authorities or by Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies, the market surveillance authority referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 2 Scope 1. This Regulation applies to: (a) providers placing on the market or putting into service AI systems or placing on the market general-purpose AI models in the Union, irrespective of whether those providers are established or located within the Union or in a third country; (b) deployers of AI systems that have their place of establishment or are located within the Union; (c) providers and deployers of AI systems that have their place of establishment or are located in a third country, where the output produced by the AI system is used in the Union; (d) importers and distributors of AI systems; (e) product manufacturers placing on the market or putting into service an AI system together with their product and under their own name or trademark; (f) authorised representatives of providers, which are not established in the Union; (g) affected persons that are located in the Union. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 11(1) The technical documentation referred to in Article 11(1) shall contain at least the following information, as applicable to the relevant AI system: 1. A general description of the AI system including: (a) its intended purpose, the name of the provider and the version of the system reflecting its relation to previous versions; (b) how the AI system interacts with, or can be used to interact with, hardware or software, including with other AI systems, that are not part of the AI system itself, where applicable; (c) the versions of relevant software or firmware, and any requirements related to version updates; (d) the description of all the forms in which the AI system is placed on the market or put into service, such as software packages embedded into hardware, downloads, or APIs; (e) the description of the hardware on which the AI system is intended to run; (f) where the AI system is a component of products, photographs or illustrations showing external features, the marking and internal layout of those products; (g) a basic description of the user-interface provided to the deployer; (h) instructions for use for the deployer, and a basic description of the user-interface provided to the deployer, where applicable; 2. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 5(1), first subparagraph, point (h)(iii) Criminal offences referred to in Article 5(1), first subparagraph, point (h)(iii): — terrorism, — trafficking in human beings, — sexual exploitation of children, and child pornography, — illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances, — illicit trafficking in weapons, munitions or explosives, — murder, grievous bodily injury, — illicit trade in human organs or tissue, — illicit trafficking in nuclear or radioactive materials, — kidnapping, illegal restraint or hostage-taking, — crimes within the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court, — unlawful seizure of aircraft or ships, — rape, — environmental crime, — organised or armed robbery, — sabotage, — participation in a criminal organisation involved in one or more of the offences listed above. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 84 Union AI testing support structures 1. The Commission shall designate one or more Union AI testing support structures to perform the tasks listed under Article 21(6) of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 in the area of AI. 2. Without prejudice to the tasks referred to in paragraph 1, Union AI testing support structures shall also provide independent technical or scientific advice at the request of the Board, the Commission, or of market surveillance authorities. SECTION 4 Remedies Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 60(4) point (c), and the contact details of the provider or its legal representative from whom further information can be obtained. 2. The informed consent shall be dated and documented and a copy shall be given to the subjects of testing or their legal representative. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 12. Article 14 Human oversight 1. High-risk AI systems shall be designed and developed in such a way, including with appropriate human-machine interface tools, that they can be effectively overseen by natural persons during the period in which they are in use. 2. Human oversight shall aim to prevent or minimise the risks to health, safety or fundamental rights that may emerge when a high-risk AI system is used in accordance with its intended purpose or under conditions of reasonably foreseeable misuse, in particular where such risks persist despite the application of other requirements set out in this Section. 3. The oversight measures shall be commensurate with the risks, level of autonomy and context of use of the high-risk AI system, and shall be ensured through either one or both of the following types of measures: (a) measures identified and built, when technically feasible, into the high-risk AI system by the provider before it is placed on the market or put into service; (b) measures identified by the provider before placing the high-risk AI system on the market or putting it into service and that are appropriate to be implemented by the deployer. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 31 Requirements relating to notified bodies 1. A notified body shall be established under the national law of a Member State and shall have legal personality. 2. Notified bodies shall satisfy the organisational, quality management, resources and process requirements that are necessary to fulfil their tasks, as well as suitable cybersecurity requirements. 3. The organisational structure, allocation of responsibilities, reporting lines and operation of notified bodies shall ensure confidence in their performance, and in the results of the conformity assessment activities that the notified bodies conduct. 4. Notified bodies shall be independent of the provider of a high-risk AI system in relation to which they perform conformity assessment activities. Notified bodies shall also be independent of any other operator having an economic interest in high-risk AI systems assessed, as well as of any competitors of the provider. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 42 Presumption of conformity with certain requirements 1. High-risk AI systems that have been trained and tested on data reflecting the specific geographical, behavioural, contextual or functional setting within which they are intended to be used shall be presumed to comply with the relevant requirements laid down in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 6. 2. Where the circumstances referred to in paragraph 1 occur, the provider that initially placed the AI system on the market or put it into service shall no longer be considered to be a provider of that specific AI system for the purposes of this Regulation. That initial provider shall closely cooperate with new providers and shall make available the necessary information and provide the reasonably expected technical access and other assistance that are required for the fulfilment of the obligations set out in this Regulation, in particular regarding the compliance with the conformity assessment of high-risk AI systems. This paragraph shall not apply in cases where the initial provider has clearly specified that its AI system is not to be changed into a high-risk AI system and therefore does not fall under the obligation to hand over the documentation. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 12 Record-keeping 1. High-risk AI systems shall technically allow for the automatic recording of events (logs) over the lifetime of the system. 2. In order to ensure a level of traceability of the functioning of a high-risk AI system that is appropriate to the intended purpose of the system, logging capabilities shall enable the recording of events relevant for: (a) identifying situations that may result in the high-risk AI system presenting a risk within the meaning of Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 5 TEU. In accordance with the principle of proportionality as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve that objective. (177) In order to ensure legal certainty, ensure an appropriate adaptation period for operators and avoid disruption to the market, including by ensuring continuity of the use of AI systems, it is appropriate that this Regulation applies to the high-risk AI systems that have been placed on the market or put into service before the general date of application thereof, only if, from that date, those systems are subject to significant changes in their design or intended purpose. It is appropriate to clarify that, in this respect, the concept of significant change should be understood as equivalent in substance to the notion of substantial modification, which is used with regard only to high-risk AI systems pursuant to this Regulation. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 47 is issued under the sole responsibility of the provider; 4. A statement that the AI system is in conformity with this Regulation and, if applicable, with any other relevant Union law that provides for the issuing of the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 60. 8. The testing of high-risk AI systems shall be performed, as appropriate, at any time throughout the development process, and, in any event, prior to their being placed on the market or put into service. Testing shall be carried out against prior defined metrics and probabilistic thresholds that are appropriate to the intended purpose of the high-risk AI system. 9. When implementing the risk management system as provided for in paragraphs 1 to 7, providers shall give consideration to whether in view of its intended purpose the high-risk AI system is likely to have an adverse impact on persons under the age of 18 and, as appropriate, other vulnerable groups. 10. For providers of high-risk AI systems that are subject to requirements regarding internal risk management processes under other relevant provisions of Union law, the aspects provided in paragraphs 1 to 9 may be part of, or combined with, the risk management procedures established pursuant to that law. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 90(1), point (a). 2. The Commission may decide to appoint independent experts to carry out evaluations on its behalf, including from the scientific panel established pursuant to Article 68. Independent experts appointed for this task shall meet the criteria outlined in Article 68(2). 3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Commission may request access to the general-purpose AI model concerned through APIs or further appropriate technical means and tools, including source code. 4. The request for access shall state the legal basis, the purpose and reasons of the request and set the period within which the access is to be provided, and the fines provided for in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 103 Amendment to Regulation (EU) No 167/2013 In Article 17(5) of Regulation (EU) No 167/2013, the following subparagraph is added: ‘When adopting delegated acts pursuant to the first subparagraph concerning artificial intelligence systems which are safety components within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*), the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2, of that Regulation shall be taken into account. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 17. The decision shall be notified to the provider or its authorised representative. The notification shall contain the conclusions of the assessment of the quality management system and the reasoned assessment decision. 3.3. The quality management system as approved shall continue to be implemented and maintained by the provider so that it remains adequate and efficient. 3.4. Any intended change to the approved quality management system or the list of AI systems covered by the latter shall be brought to the attention of the notified body by the provider. The proposed changes shall be examined by the notified body, which shall decide whether the modified quality management system continues to satisfy the requirements referred to in point 3.2 or whether a reassessment is necessary. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 16, in any of the following circumstances: (a) they put their name or trademark on a high-risk AI system already placed on the market or put into service, without prejudice to contractual arrangements stipulating that the obligations are otherwise allocated; (b) they make a substantial modification to a high-risk AI system that has already been placed on the market or has already been put into service in such a way that it remains a high-risk AI system pursuant to Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 78, and with the agreement of the provider or prospective provider, the Commission and the Board shall be authorised to access the exit reports and shall take them into account, as appropriate, when exercising their tasks under this Regulation. If both the provider or prospective provider and the national competent authority explicitly agree, the exit report may be made publicly available through the single information platform referred to in this Article. 9. The establishment of AI regulatory sandboxes shall aim to contribute to the following objectives: (a) improving legal certainty to achieve regulatory compliance with this Regulation or, where relevant, other applicable Union and national law; (b) supporting the sharing of best practices through cooperation with the authorities involved in the AI regulatory sandbox; (c) fostering innovation and competitiveness and facilitating the development of an AI ecosystem; (d) contributing to evidence-based regulatory learning; (e) facilitating and accelerating access to the Union market for AI systems, in particular when provided by SMEs, including start-ups. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 98(2). 7. Prior to requesting access to the general-purpose AI model concerned, the AI Office may initiate a structured dialogue with the provider of the general-purpose AI model to gather more information on the internal testing of the model, internal safeguards for preventing systemic risks, and other internal procedures and measures the provider has taken to mitigate such risks. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 74(10), for a period of 10 years after the high-risk AI system has been placed on the market or put into service, the contact details of the provider that appointed the authorised representative, a copy of the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Article 47, the technical documentation and, if applicable, the certificate issued by the notified body; (c) provide a competent authority, upon a reasoned request, with all the information and documentation, including that referred to in point (b) of this subparagraph, necessary to demonstrate the conformity of a high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Section 2, including access to the logs, as referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, Article 10 of Directive (EU) 2016/680 and Article 10(1) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725; (38) ‘sensitive operational data’ means operational data related to activities of prevention, detection, investigation or prosecution of criminal offences, the disclosure of which could jeopardise the integrity of criminal proceedings; (39) ‘emotion recognition system’ means an AI system for the purpose of identifying or inferring emotions or intentions of natural persons on the basis of their biometric data; (40) ‘biometric categorisation system’ means an AI system for the purpose of assigning natural persons to specific categories on the basis of their biometric data, unless it is ancillary to another commercial service and strictly necessary for objective technical reasons; (41) ‘remote biometric identification system’ means an AI system for the purpose of identifying natural persons, without their active involvement, typically at a distance through the comparison of a person’s biometric data with the biometric data contained in a reference database; (42) ‘real-time remote biometric identification system’ means a remote biometric identification system, whereby the capturing of biometric data, the comparison and the identification all occur without a significant delay, comprising not only instant identification, but also limited short delays in order to avoid circumvention; (43) ‘post-remote biometric identification system’ means a remote biometric identification system other than a real-time remote biometric identification system; (44) ‘publicly accessible space’ means any publicly or privately owned physical place accessible to an undetermined number of natural persons, regardless of whether certain conditions for access may apply, and regardless of the potential capacity restrictions; (45) ‘law enforcement authority’ means: (a) any public authority competent for the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security; or (b) any other body or entity entrusted by Member State law to exercise public authority and public powers for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security; (46) ‘law enforcement’ means activities carried out by law enforcement authorities or on their behalf for the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including safeguarding against and preventing threats to public security; (47) ‘AI Office’ means the Commission’s function of contributing to the implementation, monitoring and supervision of AI systems and general-purpose AI models, and AI governance, provided for in Commission Decision of 24 January 2024; references in this Regulation to the AI Office shall be construed as references to the Commission; (48) ‘national competent authority’ means a notifying authority or a market surveillance authority; as regards AI systems put into service or used by Union institutions, agencies, offices and bodies, references to national competent authorities or market surveillance authorities in this Regulation shall be construed as references to the European Data Protection Supervisor; (49) ‘serious incident’ means an incident or malfunctioning of an AI system that directly or indirectly leads to any of the following: (a) the death of a person, or serious harm to a person’s health; (b) a serious and irreversible disruption of the management or operation of critical infrastructure; (c) the infringement of obligations under Union law intended to protect fundamental rights; (d) serious harm to property or the environment; (50) ‘personal data’ means personal data as defined in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 113 Entry into force and application This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. It shall apply from 2 August 2026. However: (a) Chapters I and II shall apply from 2 February 2025; (b) Chapter III Section 4, Chapter V, Chapter VII and Chapter XII and Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 73; (j) the handling of communication with national competent authorities, other relevant authorities, including those providing or supporting the access to data, notified bodies, other operators, customers or other interested parties; (k) systems and procedures for record-keeping of all relevant documentation and information; (l) resource management, including security-of-supply related measures; (m) an accountability framework setting out the responsibilities of the management and other staff with regard to all the aspects listed in this paragraph. 2. The implementation of the aspects referred to in paragraph 1 shall be proportionate to the size of the provider’s organisation. Providers shall, in any event, respect the degree of rigour and the level of protection required to ensure the compliance of their high-risk AI systems with this Regulation. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 97 in order to amend Annex IV, where necessary, to ensure that, in light of technical progress, the technical documentation provides all the information necessary to assess the compliance of the system with the requirements set out in this Section. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 21 Cooperation with competent authorities 1. Providers of high-risk AI systems shall, upon a reasoned request by a competent authority, provide that authority all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Section 2, in a language which can be easily understood by the authority in one of the official languages of the institutions of the Union as indicated by the Member State concerned. 2. Upon a reasoned request by a competent authority, providers shall also give the requesting competent authority, as applicable, access to the automatically generated logs of the high-risk AI system referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 2(1), points (a) and (b) thereof, where it concerns unmanned aircraft and their engines, propellers, parts and equipment to control them remotely, are concerned. ANNEX II List of criminal offences referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 47 and instructions for use, and that the provider and the importer of that system, as applicable, have complied with their respective obligations as laid down in Article 16, points (b) and (c) and Article 23(3). 2. Where a distributor considers or has reason to consider, on the basis of the information in its possession, that a high-risk AI system is not in conformity with the requirements set out in Section 2, it shall not make the high-risk AI system available on the market until the system has been brought into conformity with those requirements. Furthermore, where the high-risk AI system presents a risk within the meaning of Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 3, point (49)(c). 10. For high-risk AI systems which are safety components of devices, or are themselves devices, covered by Regulations (EU) 2017/745 and (EU) 2017/746, the notification of serious incidents shall be limited to those referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 49(1), or, if the registration is carried out by the provider itself, ensure that the information referred to in point 3 of Section A of Annex VIII is correct. The mandate shall empower the authorised representative to be addressed, in addition to or instead of the provider, by the competent authorities, on all issues related to ensuring compliance with this Regulation. 4. The authorised representative shall terminate the mandate if it considers or has reason to consider the provider to be acting contrary to its obligations pursuant to this Regulation. In such a case, it shall immediately inform the relevant market surveillance authority, as well as, where applicable, the relevant notified body, about the termination of the mandate and the reasons therefor. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 61, or in the case of law enforcement, where the seeking of informed consent would prevent the AI system from being tested, the testing itself and the outcome of the testing in the real world conditions shall not have any negative effect on the subjects, and their personal data shall be deleted after the test is performed; (j) the testing in real world conditions is effectively overseen by the provider or prospective provider, as well as by deployers or prospective deployers through persons who are suitably qualified in the relevant field and have the necessary capacity, training and authority to perform their tasks; (k) the predictions, recommendations or decisions of the AI system can be effectively reversed and disregarded. 5. Any subjects of the testing in real world conditions, or their legally designated representative, as appropriate, may, without any resulting detriment and without having to provide any justification, withdraw from the testing at any time by revoking their informed consent and may request the immediate and permanent deletion of their personal data. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 6a of Protocol No 21 on the position of the United Kingdom and Ireland in respect of the area of freedom, security and justice, as annexed to the TEU and to the TFEU, Ireland is not bound by the rules laid down in Article 5(1), first subparagraph, point (g), to the extent it applies to the use of biometric categorisation systems for activities in the field of police cooperation and judicial cooperation in criminal matters, Article 5(1), first subparagraph, point (d), to the extent it applies to the use of AI systems covered by that provision, Article 5(1), first subparagraph, point (h), Article 5(2) to (6) and Article 26(10) of this Regulation adopted on the basis of Article 16 TFEU which relate to the processing of personal data by the Member States when carrying out activities falling within the scope of Chapter 4 or Chapter 5 of Title V of Part Three of the TFEU, where Ireland is not bound by the rules governing the forms of judicial cooperation in criminal matters or police cooperation which require compliance with the provisions laid down on the basis of Article 16 TFEU. (41) In accordance with Articles 2 and 2a of Protocol No 22 on the position of Denmark, annexed to the TEU and to the TFEU, Denmark is not bound by rules laid down in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 4, point (1), of Regulation (EU) 2016/679; (51) ‘non-personal data’ means data other than personal data as defined in Article 4, point (1), of Regulation (EU) 2016/679; (52) ‘profiling’ means profiling as defined in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 4, point (4), of Regulation (EU) 2016/679; (53) ‘real-world testing plan’ means a document that describes the objectives, methodology, geographical, population and temporal scope, monitoring, organisation and conduct of testing in real-world conditions; (54) ‘sandbox plan’ means a document agreed between the participating provider and the competent authority describing the objectives, conditions, timeframe, methodology and requirements for the activities carried out within the sandbox; (55) ‘AI regulatory sandbox’ means a controlled framework set up by a competent authority which offers providers or prospective providers of AI systems the possibility to develop, train, validate and test, where appropriate in real-world conditions, an innovative AI system, pursuant to a sandbox plan for a limited time under regulatory supervision; (56) ‘AI literacy’ means skills, knowledge and understanding that allow providers, deployers and affected persons, taking into account their respective rights and obligations in the context of this Regulation, to make an informed deployment of AI systems, as well as to gain awareness about the opportunities and risks of AI and possible harm it can cause; (57) ‘testing in real-world conditions’ means the temporary testing of an AI system for its intended purpose in real-world conditions outside a laboratory or otherwise simulated environment, with a view to gathering reliable and robust data and to assessing and verifying the conformity of the AI system with the requirements of this Regulation and it does not qualify as placing the AI system on the market or putting it into service within the meaning of this Regulation, provided that all the conditions laid down in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 71. 4. For high-risk AI systems referred to in points 1, 6 and 7 of Annex III, in the areas of law enforcement, migration, asylum and border control management, the registration referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article shall be in a secure non-public section of the EU database referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 58, the following paragraph is added: ‘3. When adopting delegated acts pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 concerning Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2024/1689, the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2, of that Regulation shall be taken into account.’. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 9(2); (iv) where applicable, the technical capabilities and characteristics of the high-risk AI system to provide information that is relevant to explain its output; (v) when appropriate, its performance regarding specific persons or groups of persons on which the system is intended to be used; (vi) when appropriate, specifications for the input data, or any other relevant information in terms of the training, validation and testing data sets used, taking into account the intended purpose of the high-risk AI system; (vii) where applicable, information to enable deployers to interpret the output of the high-risk AI system and use it appropriately; (c) the changes to the high-risk AI system and its performance which have been pre-determined by the provider at the moment of the initial conformity assessment, if any; (d) the human oversight measures referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 38. They shall also take part directly, or be represented in, European standardisation organisations, or ensure that they are aware and up to date in respect of relevant standards. Article 32 Presumption of conformity with requirements relating to notified bodies Where a conformity assessment body demonstrates its conformity with the criteria laid down in the relevant harmonised standards or parts thereof, the references of which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union, it shall be presumed to comply with the requirements set out in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 68 Scientific panel of independent experts 1. The Commission shall, by means of an implementing act, make provisions on the establishment of a scientific panel of independent experts (the ‘scientific panel’) intended to support the enforcement activities under this Regulation. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 4, point (14) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, Article 3, point (18) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 and Article 3, point (13) of Directive (EU) 2016/680. Biometric data can allow for the authentication, identification or categorisation of natural persons and for the recognition of emotions of natural persons. (15) The notion of ‘biometric identification’ referred to in this Regulation should be defined as the automated recognition of physical, physiological and behavioural human features such as the face, eye movement, body shape, voice, prosody, gait, posture, heart rate, blood pressure, odour, keystrokes characteristics, for the purpose of establishing an individual’s identity by comparing biometric data of that individual to stored biometric data of individuals in a reference database, irrespective of whether the individual has given its consent or not. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 43, reducing those fees proportionately to their size, market size and other relevant indicators. 3. The AI Office shall undertake the following actions: (a) provide standardised templates for areas covered by this Regulation, as specified by the Board in its request; (b) develop and maintain a single information platform providing easy to use information in relation to this Regulation for all operators across the Union; (c) organise appropriate communication campaigns to raise awareness about the obligations arising from this Regulation; (d) evaluate and promote the convergence of best practices in public procurement procedures in relation to AI systems. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 78. Article 46 Derogation from conformity assessment procedure 1. By way of derogation from Article 43 and upon a duly justified request, any market surveillance authority may authorise the placing on the market or the putting into service of specific high-risk AI systems within the territory of the Member State concerned, for exceptional reasons of public security or the protection of life and health of persons, environmental protection or the protection of key industrial and infrastructural assets. That authorisation shall be for a limited period while the necessary conformity assessment procedures are being carried out, taking into account the exceptional reasons justifying the derogation. The completion of those procedures shall be undertaken without undue delay. 2. In a duly justified situation of urgency for exceptional reasons of public security or in the case of specific, substantial and imminent threat to the life or physical safety of natural persons, law-enforcement authorities or civil protection authorities may put a specific high-risk AI system into service without the authorisation referred to in paragraph 1, provided that such authorisation is requested during or after the use without undue delay. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, for the purpose of ensuring the effective enforcement of this Regulation, market surveillance authorities may exercise the powers referred to in Article 14(4), points (d) and (j), of that Regulation remotely, as appropriate. 6. For high-risk AI systems placed on the market, put into service, or used by financial institutions regulated by Union financial services law, the market surveillance authority for the purposes of this Regulation shall be the relevant national authority responsible for the financial supervision of those institutions under that legislation in so far as the placing on the market, putting into service, or the use of the AI system is in direct connection with the provision of those financial services. 7. By way of derogation from paragraph 6, in appropriate circumstances, and provided that coordination is ensured, another relevant authority may be identified by the Member State as market surveillance authority for the purposes of this Regulation. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 96. The penalties provided for shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. They shall take into account the interests of SMEs, including start-ups, and their economic viability. 2. The Member States shall, without delay and at the latest by the date of entry into application, notify the Commission of the rules on penalties and of other enforcement measures referred to in paragraph 1, and shall notify it, without delay, of any subsequent amendment to them. 3. Non-compliance with the prohibition of the AI practices referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 96 together with a comprehensive list of practical examples of use cases of AI systems that are high-risk and not high-risk. 6. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 96 Guidelines from the Commission on the implementation of this Regulation 1. The Commission shall develop guidelines on the practical implementation of this Regulation, and in particular on: (a) the application of the requirements and obligations referred to in Articles 8 to 15 and in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 40, or, where applicable, common specifications referred to in Article 41, the provider shall opt for one of the following conformity assessment procedures based on: (a) the internal control referred to in Annex VI; or (b) the assessment of the quality management system and the assessment of the technical documentation, with the involvement of a notified body, referred to in Annex VII. In demonstrating the compliance of a high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Section 2, the provider shall follow the conformity assessment procedure set out in Annex VII where: (a) harmonised standards referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 61 Informed consent to participate in testing in real world conditions outside AI regulatory sandboxes 1. For the purpose of testing in real world conditions under Article 60, freely-given informed consent shall be obtained from the subjects of testing prior to their participation in such testing and after their having been duly informed with concise, clear, relevant, and understandable information regarding: (a) the nature and objectives of the testing in real world conditions and the possible inconvenience that may be linked to their participation; (b) the conditions under which the testing in real world conditions is to be conducted, including the expected duration of the subject or subjects’ participation; (c) their rights, and the guarantees regarding their participation, in particular their right to refuse to participate in, and the right to withdraw from, testing in real world conditions at any time without any resulting detriment and without having to provide any justification; (d) the arrangements for requesting the reversal or the disregarding of the predictions, recommendations or decisions of the AI system; (e) the Union-wide unique single identification number of the testing in real world conditions in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 35 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 or Article 27 of Directive (EU) 2016/680, the fundamental rights impact assessment referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall complement that data protection impact assessment. 5. The AI Office shall develop a template for a questionnaire, including through an automated tool, to facilitate deployers in complying with their obligations under this Article in a simplified manner. SECTION 4 Notifying authorities and notified bodies Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 78. Article 78 Confidentiality 1. The Commission, market surveillance authorities and notified bodies and any other natural or legal person involved in the application of this Regulation shall, in accordance with Union or national law, respect the confidentiality of information and data obtained in carrying out their tasks and activities in such a manner as to protect, in particular: (a) the intellectual property rights and confidential business information or trade secrets of a natural or legal person, including source code, except in the cases referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 13 and, where appropriate, training to deployers. With a view to eliminating or reducing risks related to the use of the high-risk AI system, due consideration shall be given to the technical knowledge, experience, education, the training to be expected by the deployer, and the presumable context in which the system is intended to be used. 6. High-risk AI systems shall be tested for the purpose of identifying the most appropriate and targeted risk management measures. Testing shall ensure that high-risk AI systems perform consistently for their intended purpose and that they are in compliance with the requirements set out in this Section. 7. Testing procedures may include testing in real-world conditions in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 30(2). 2. The procedures laid down in Articles 29 and 30 shall apply to extensions of the scope of the notification. For changes to the notification other than extensions of its scope, the procedures laid down in paragraphs (3) to (9) shall apply. 3. Where a notified body decides to cease its conformity assessment activities, it shall inform the notifying authority and the providers concerned as soon as possible and, in the case of a planned cessation, at least one year before ceasing its activities. The certificates of the notified body may remain valid for a period of nine months after cessation of the notified body’s activities, on condition that another notified body has confirmed in writing that it will assume responsibilities for the high-risk AI systems covered by those certificates. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 18 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall apply to the measures referred to in the second subparagraph of this paragraph. 3. Where the market surveillance authority considers that the non-compliance is not restricted to its national territory, it shall inform the Commission and the other Member States without undue delay of the results of the evaluation and of the actions which it has required the operator to take. 4. The operator shall ensure that all appropriate corrective action is taken in respect of all the AI systems concerned that it has made available on the Union market. 5. Where the operator of an AI system does not take adequate corrective action within the period referred to in paragraph 2, the market surveillance authority shall take all appropriate provisional measures to prohibit or restrict the AI system’s being made available on its national market or put into service, to withdraw the product or the standalone AI system from that market or to recall it. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 26; (f) requirements and obligations of notified bodies pursuant to Article 31, Article 33(1), (3) and (4) or Article 34; (g) transparency obligations for providers and deployers pursuant to Article 50. 5. The supply of incorrect, incomplete or misleading information to notified bodies or national competent authorities in reply to a request shall be subject to administrative fines of up to EUR 7 500 000 or, if the offender is an undertaking, up to 1 % of its total worldwide annual turnover for the preceding financial year, whichever is higher. 6. In the case of SMEs, including start-ups, each fine referred to in this Article shall be up to the percentages or amount referred to in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5, whichever thereof is lower. 7. When deciding whether to impose an administrative fine and when deciding on the amount of the administrative fine in each individual case, all relevant circumstances of the specific situation shall be taken into account and, as appropriate, regard shall be given to the following: (a) the nature, gravity and duration of the infringement and of its consequences, taking into account the purpose of the AI system, as well as, where appropriate, the number of affected persons and the level of damage suffered by them; (b) whether administrative fines have already been applied by other market surveillance authorities to the same operator for the same infringement; (c) whether administrative fines have already been applied by other authorities to the same operator for infringements of other Union or national law, when such infringements result from the same activity or omission constituting a relevant infringement of this Regulation; (d) the size, the annual turnover and market share of the operator committing the infringement; (e) any other aggravating or mitigating factor applicable to the circumstances of the case, such as financial benefits gained, or losses avoided, directly or indirectly, from the infringement; (f) the degree of cooperation with the national competent authorities, in order to remedy the infringement and mitigate the possible adverse effects of the infringement; (g) the degree of responsibility of the operator taking into account the technical and organisational measures implemented by it; (h) the manner in which the infringement became known to the national competent authorities, in particular whether, and if so to what extent, the operator notified the infringement; (i) the intentional or negligent character of the infringement; (j) any action taken by the operator to mitigate the harm suffered by the affected persons. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 24 of the Charter and in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, further developed in the UNCRC General Comment No 25 as regards the digital environment, both of which require consideration of the children’s vulnerabilities and provision of such protection and care as necessary for their well-being. The fundamental right to a high level of environmental protection enshrined in the Charter and implemented in Union policies should also be considered when assessing the severity of the harm that an AI system can cause, including in relation to the health and safety of persons. (49) As regards high-risk AI systems that are safety components of products or systems, or which are themselves products or systems falling within the scope of Regulation (EC) No 300/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council (24), Regulation (EU) No 167/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (25), Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (26), Directive 2014/90/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (27), Directive (EU) 2016/797 of the European Parliament and of the Council (28), Regulation (EU) 2018/858 of the European Parliament and of the Council (29), Regulation (EU) 2018/1139 of the European Parliament and of the Council (30), and Regulation (EU) 2019/2144 of the European Parliament and of the Council (31), it is appropriate to amend those acts to ensure that the Commission takes into account, on the basis of the technical and regulatory specificities of each sector, and without interfering with existing governance, conformity assessment and enforcement mechanisms and authorities established therein, the mandatory requirements for high-risk AI systems laid down in this Regulation when adopting any relevant delegated or implementing acts on the basis of those acts. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 99. 5. The provider shall ensure that all appropriate corrective action is taken in respect of all the AI systems concerned that it has made available on the Union market. 6. Where the provider of the AI system concerned does not take adequate corrective action within the period referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 74(8) shall have access to the respective restricted sections of the EU database listed in the first subparagraph of this paragraph. 5. High-risk AI systems referred to in point 2 of Annex III shall be registered at national level. CHAPTER IV TRANSPARENCY OBLIGATIONS FOR PROVIDERS AND DEPLOYERS OF CERTAIN AI SYSTEMS Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 49 Section A — Information to be submitted by providers of high-risk AI systems in accordance with Article 49(1) The following information shall be provided and thereafter kept up to date with regard to high-risk AI systems to be registered in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 78 of this Regulation. The procedure provided for in Chapter VI of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall apply mutatis mutandis. Article 76 Supervision of testing in real world conditions by market surveillance authorities 1. Market surveillance authorities shall have competences and powers to ensure that testing in real world conditions is in accordance with this Regulation. 2. Where testing in real world conditions is conducted for AI systems that are supervised within an AI regulatory sandbox under Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 5 of Directive (EU) 2016/943 of the European Parliament and of the Council (57); (b) the effective implementation of this Regulation, in particular for the purposes of inspections, investigations or audits; (c) public and national security interests; (d) the conduct of criminal or administrative proceedings; (e) information classified pursuant to Union or national law. 2. The authorities involved in the application of this Regulation pursuant to paragraph 1 shall request only data that is strictly necessary for the assessment of the risk posed by AI systems and for the exercise of their powers in accordance with this Regulation and with Regulation (EU) 2019/1020. They shall put in place adequate and effective cybersecurity measures to protect the security and confidentiality of the information and data obtained, and shall delete the data collected as soon as it is no longer needed for the purpose for which it was obtained, in accordance with applicable Union or national law. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 5. The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, specify the detailed elements of the real-world testing plan. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 9 Risk management system 1. A risk management system shall be established, implemented, documented and maintained in relation to high-risk AI systems. 2. The risk management system shall be understood as a continuous iterative process planned and run throughout the entire lifecycle of a high-risk AI system, requiring regular systematic review and updating. It shall comprise the following steps: (a) the identification and analysis of the known and the reasonably foreseeable risks that the high-risk AI system can pose to health, safety or fundamental rights when the high-risk AI system is used in accordance with its intended purpose; (b) the estimation and evaluation of the risks that may emerge when the high-risk AI system is used in accordance with its intended purpose, and under conditions of reasonably foreseeable misuse; (c) the evaluation of other risks possibly arising, based on the analysis of data gathered from the post-market monitoring system referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 26 Obligations of deployers of high-risk AI systems 1. Deployers of high-risk AI systems shall take appropriate technical and organisational measures to ensure they use such systems in accordance with the instructions for use accompanying the systems, pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 6. 2. Deployers shall assign human oversight to natural persons who have the necessary competence, training and authority, as well as the necessary support. 3. The obligations set out in paragraphs 1 and 2, are without prejudice to other deployer obligations under Union or national law and to the deployer’s freedom to organise its own resources and activities for the purpose of implementing the human oversight measures indicated by the provider. 4. Without prejudice to paragraphs 1 and 2, to the extent the deployer exercises control over the input data, that deployer shall ensure that input data is relevant and sufficiently representative in view of the intended purpose of the high-risk AI system. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 17 Quality management system 1. Providers of high-risk AI systems shall put a quality management system in place that ensures compliance with this Regulation. That system shall be documented in a systematic and orderly manner in the form of written policies, procedures and instructions, and shall include at least the following aspects: (a) a strategy for regulatory compliance, including compliance with conformity assessment procedures and procedures for the management of modifications to the high-risk AI system; (b) techniques, procedures and systematic actions to be used for the design, design control and design verification of the high-risk AI system; (c) techniques, procedures and systematic actions to be used for the development, quality control and quality assurance of the high-risk AI system; (d) examination, test and validation procedures to be carried out before, during and after the development of the high-risk AI system, and the frequency with which they have to be carried out; (e) technical specifications, including standards, to be applied and, where the relevant harmonised standards are not applied in full or do not cover all of the relevant requirements set out in Section 2, the means to be used to ensure that the high-risk AI system complies with those requirements; (f) systems and procedures for data management, including data acquisition, data collection, data analysis, data labelling, data storage, data filtration, data mining, data aggregation, data retention and any other operation regarding the data that is performed before and for the purpose of the placing on the market or the putting into service of high-risk AI systems; (g) the risk management system referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 60 Testing of high-risk AI systems in real world conditions outside AI regulatory sandboxes 1. Testing of high-risk AI systems in real world conditions outside AI regulatory sandboxes may be conducted by providers or prospective providers of high-risk AI systems listed in Annex III, in accordance with this Article and the real-world testing plan referred to in this Article, without prejudice to the prohibitions under Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 49(2). Upon request of national competent authorities, the provider shall provide the documentation of the assessment. 5. The Commission shall, after consulting the European Artificial Intelligence Board (the ‘Board’), and no later than 2 February 2026, provide guidelines specifying the practical implementation of this Article in line with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 9(2), point (g) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and Article 10(2), point (g) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725. (71) Having comprehensible information on how high-risk AI systems have been developed and how they perform throughout their lifetime is essential to enable traceability of those systems, verify compliance with the requirements under this Regulation, as well as monitoring of their operations and post market monitoring. This requires keeping records and the availability of technical documentation, containing information which is necessary to assess the compliance of the AI system with the relevant requirements and facilitate post market monitoring. Such information should include the general characteristics, capabilities and limitations of the system, algorithms, data, training, testing and validation processes used as well as documentation on the relevant risk-management system and drawn in a clear and comprehensive form. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 34 Operational obligations of notified bodies 1. Notified bodies shall verify the conformity of high-risk AI systems in accordance with the conformity assessment procedures set out in Article 43. 2. Notified bodies shall avoid unnecessary burdens for providers when performing their activities, and take due account of the size of the provider, the sector in which it operates, its structure and the degree of complexity of the high-risk AI system concerned, in particular in view of minimising administrative burdens and compliance costs for micro- and small enterprises within the meaning of Recommendation 2003/361/EC. The notified body shall, nevertheless, respect the degree of rigour and the level of protection required for the compliance of the high-risk AI system with the requirements of this Regulation. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 112 Evaluation and review 1. The Commission shall assess the need for amendment of the list set out in Annex III and of the list of prohibited AI practices laid down in Article 5, once a year following the entry into force of this Regulation, and until the end of the period of the delegation of power laid down in Article 97. The Commission shall submit the findings of that assessment to the European Parliament and the Council. 2. By 2 August 2028 and every four years thereafter, the Commission shall evaluate and report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the following: (a) the need for amendments extending existing area headings or adding new area headings in Annex III; (b) amendments to the list of AI systems requiring additional transparency measures in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 97 in order to amend paragraph 3, second subparagraph, of this Article by adding new conditions to those laid down therein, or by modifying them, where there is concrete and reliable evidence of the existence of AI systems that fall under the scope of Annex III, but do not pose a significant risk of harm to the health, safety or fundamental rights of natural persons. 7. The Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 10(4). 2. High-risk AI systems that have been certified or for which a statement of conformity has been issued under a cybersecurity scheme pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2019/881 and the references of which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union shall be presumed to comply with the cybersecurity requirements set out in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 31(4), (5), (10) and (11) has been assessed in the context of the notification procedure under those legal acts. Where a legal act listed in Section A of Annex I enables the product manufacturer to opt out from a third-party conformity assessment, provided that that manufacturer has applied all harmonised standards covering all the relevant requirements, that manufacturer may use that option only if it has also applied harmonised standards or, where applicable, common specifications referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 49. When such deployers find that the high-risk AI system that they envisage using has not been registered in the EU database referred to in Article 71, they shall not use that system and shall inform the provider or the distributor. 9. Where applicable, deployers of high-risk AI systems shall use the information provided under Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 28 Notifying authorities 1. Each Member State shall designate or establish at least one notifying authority responsible for setting up and carrying out the necessary procedures for the assessment, designation and notification of conformity assessment bodies and for their monitoring. Those procedures shall be developed in cooperation between the notifying authorities of all Member States. 2. Member States may decide that the assessment and monitoring referred to in paragraph 1 is to be carried out by a national accreditation body within the meaning of, and in accordance with, Regulation (EC) No 765/2008. 3. Notifying authorities shall be established, organised and operated in such a way that no conflict of interest arises with conformity assessment bodies, and that the objectivity and impartiality of their activities are safeguarded. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 97 in order to amend Annex V by updating the content of the EU declaration of conformity set out in that Annex, in order to introduce elements that become necessary in light of technical progress. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 6 Classification rules for high-risk AI systems 1. Irrespective of whether an AI system is placed on the market or put into service independently of the products referred to in points (a) and (b), that AI system shall be considered to be high-risk where both of the following conditions are fulfilled: (a) the AI system is intended to be used as a safety component of a product, or the AI system is itself a product, covered by the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex I; (b) the product whose safety component pursuant to point (a) is the AI system, or the AI system itself as a product, is required to undergo a third-party conformity assessment, with a view to the placing on the market or the putting into service of that product pursuant to the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex I. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 49(3) The following information shall be provided and thereafter kept up to date with regard to high-risk AI systems to be registered in accordance with Article 49(3): 1. The name, address and contact details of the deployer; 2. The name, address and contact details of the person submitting information on behalf of the deployer; 3. The URL of the entry of the AI system in the EU database by its provider; 4. A summary of the findings of the fundamental rights impact assessment conducted in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 17; (d) keep the documentation referred to in Article 18; (e) when under their control, keep the logs automatically generated by their high-risk AI systems as referred to in Article 19; (f) ensure that the high-risk AI system undergoes the relevant conformity assessment procedure as referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 72 is consistent with the technical documentation. ANNEX VII Conformity based on an assessment of the quality management system and an assessment of the technical documentation 1. Introduction Conformity based on an assessment of the quality management system and an assessment of the technical documentation is the conformity assessment procedure based on points 2 to 5. 2. Overview The approved quality management system for the design, development and testing of AI systems pursuant to Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 27 and has registered the system in the EU database according to Article 49. However, in duly justified cases of urgency, the use of such systems may be commenced without the registration in the EU database, provided that such registration is completed without undue delay. 3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (h) and paragraph 2, each use for the purposes of law enforcement of a ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification system in publicly accessible spaces shall be subject to a prior authorisation granted by a judicial authority or an independent administrative authority whose decision is binding of the Member State in which the use is to take place, issued upon a reasoned request and in accordance with the detailed rules of national law referred to in paragraph 5. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 89 Monitoring actions 1. For the purpose of carrying out the tasks assigned to it under this Section, the AI Office may take the necessary actions to monitor the effective implementation and compliance with this Regulation by providers of general-purpose AI models, including their adherence to approved codes of practice. 2. Downstream providers shall have the right to lodge a complaint alleging an infringement of this Regulation. A complaint shall be duly reasoned and indicate at least: (a) the point of contact of the provider of the general-purpose AI model concerned; (b) a description of the relevant facts, the provisions of this Regulation concerned, and the reason why the downstream provider considers that the provider of the general-purpose AI model concerned infringed this Regulation; (c) any other information that the downstream provider that sent the request considers relevant, including, where appropriate, information gathered on its own initiative. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 90 Alerts of systemic risks by the scientific panel 1. The scientific panel may provide a qualified alert to the AI Office where it has reason to suspect that: (a) a general-purpose AI model poses concrete identifiable risk at Union level; or (b) a general-purpose AI model meets the conditions referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 5 Prohibited AI practices 1. The following AI practices shall be prohibited: (a) the placing on the market, the putting into service or the use of an AI system that deploys subliminal techniques beyond a person’s consciousness or purposefully manipulative or deceptive techniques, with the objective, or the effect of materially distorting the behaviour of a person or a group of persons by appreciably impairing their ability to make an informed decision, thereby causing them to take a decision that they would not have otherwise taken in a manner that causes or is reasonably likely to cause that person, another person or group of persons significant harm; (b) the placing on the market, the putting into service or the use of an AI system that exploits any of the vulnerabilities of a natural person or a specific group of persons due to their age, disability or a specific social or economic situation, with the objective, or the effect, of materially distorting the behaviour of that person or a person belonging to that group in a manner that causes or is reasonably likely to cause that person or another person significant harm; (c) the placing on the market, the putting into service or the use of AI systems for the evaluation or classification of natural persons or groups of persons over a certain period of time based on their social behaviour or known, inferred or predicted personal or personality characteristics, with the social score leading to either or both of the following: (i) detrimental or unfavourable treatment of certain natural persons or groups of persons in social contexts that are unrelated to the contexts in which the data was originally generated or collected; (ii) detrimental or unfavourable treatment of certain natural persons or groups of persons that is unjustified or disproportionate to their social behaviour or its gravity; (d) the placing on the market, the putting into service for this specific purpose, or the use of an AI system for making risk assessments of natural persons in order to assess or predict the risk of a natural person committing a criminal offence, based solely on the profiling of a natural person or on assessing their personality traits and characteristics; this prohibition shall not apply to AI systems used to support the human assessment of the involvement of a person in a criminal activity, which is already based on objective and verifiable facts directly linked to a criminal activity; (e) the placing on the market, the putting into service for this specific purpose, or the use of AI systems that create or expand facial recognition databases through the untargeted scraping of facial images from the internet or CCTV footage; (f) the placing on the market, the putting into service for this specific purpose, or the use of AI systems to infer emotions of a natural person in the areas of workplace and education institutions, except where the use of the AI system is intended to be put in place or into the market for medical or safety reasons; (g) the placing on the market, the putting into service for this specific purpose, or the use of biometric categorisation systems that categorise individually natural persons based on their biometric data to deduce or infer their race, political opinions, trade union membership, religious or philosophical beliefs, sex life or sexual orientation; this prohibition does not cover any labelling or filtering of lawfully acquired biometric datasets, such as images, based on biometric data or categorizing of biometric data in the area of law enforcement; (h) the use of ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces for the purposes of law enforcement, unless and in so far as such use is strictly necessary for one of the following objectives: (i) the targeted search for specific victims of abduction, trafficking in human beings or sexual exploitation of human beings, as well as the search for missing persons; (ii) the prevention of a specific, substantial and imminent threat to the life or physical safety of natural persons or a genuine and present or genuine and foreseeable threat of a terrorist attack; (iii) the localisation or identification of a person suspected of having committed a criminal offence, for the purpose of conducting a criminal investigation or prosecution or executing a criminal penalty for offences referred to in Annex II and punishable in the Member State concerned by a custodial sentence or a detention order for a maximum period of at least four years. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 41 Common specifications 1. The Commission may adopt, implementing acts establishing common specifications for the requirements set out in Section 2 of this Chapter or, as applicable, for the obligations set out in Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter V where the following conditions have been fulfilled: (a) the Commission has requested, pursuant to Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 79 Procedure at national level for dealing with AI systems presenting a risk 1. AI systems presenting a risk shall be understood as a ‘product presenting a risk’ as defined in Article 3, point 19 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, in so far as they present risks to the health or safety, or to fundamental rights, of persons. 2. Where the market surveillance authority of a Member State has sufficient reason to consider an AI system to present a risk as referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, it shall carry out an evaluation of the AI system concerned in respect of its compliance with all the requirements and obligations laid down in this Regulation. Particular attention shall be given to AI systems presenting a risk to vulnerable groups. Where risks to fundamental rights are identified, the market surveillance authority shall also inform and fully cooperate with the relevant national public authorities or bodies referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 11 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012. Article 82 Compliant AI systems which present a risk 1. Where, having performed an evaluation under Article 79, after consulting the relevant national public authority referred to in Article 77(1), the market surveillance authority of a Member State finds that although a high-risk AI system complies with this Regulation, it nevertheless presents a risk to the health or safety of persons, to fundamental rights, or to other aspects of public interest protection, it shall require the relevant operator to take all appropriate measures to ensure that the AI system concerned, when placed on the market or put into service, no longer presents that risk without undue delay, within a period it may prescribe. 2. The provider or other relevant operator shall ensure that corrective action is taken in respect of all the AI systems concerned that it has made available on the Union market within the timeline prescribed by the market surveillance authority of the Member State referred to in paragraph 1. Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 98(2). 2. The implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1 shall ensure: (a) that AI regulatory sandboxes are open to any applying provider or prospective provider of an AI system who fulfils eligibility and selection criteria, which shall be transparent and fair, and that national competent authorities inform applicants of their decision within three months of the application; (b) that AI regulatory sandboxes allow broad and equal access and keep up with demand for participation; providers and prospective providers may also submit applications in partnerships with deployers and other relevant third parties; (c) that the detailed arrangements for, and conditions concerning AI regulatory sandboxes support, to the best extent possible, flexibility for national competent authorities to establish and operate their AI regulatory sandboxes; (d) that access to the AI regulatory sandboxes is free of charge for SMEs, including start-ups, without prejudice to exceptional costs that national competent authorities may recover in a fair and proportionate manner; (e) that they facilitate providers and prospective providers, by means of the learning outcomes of the AI regulatory sandboxes, in complying with conformity assessment obligations under this Regulation and the voluntary application of the codes of conduct referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 79(1), the importer shall inform the provider of the system, the authorised representative and the market surveillance authorities to that effect. 3. Importers shall indicate their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, and the address at which they can be contacted on the high-risk AI system and on its packaging or its accompanying documentation, where applicable. 4. Importers shall ensure that, while a high-risk AI system is under their responsibility, storage or transport conditions, where applicable, do not jeopardise its compliance with the requirements set out in Section 2. 5. Importers shall keep, for a period of 10 years after the high-risk AI system has been placed on the market or put into service, a copy of the certificate issued by the notified body, where applicable, of the instructions for use, and of the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
Article 43, prior to its being placed on the market or put into service; (g) draw up an EU declaration of conformity in accordance with Article 47; (h) affix the CE marking to the high-risk AI system or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or its accompanying documentation, to indicate conformity with this Regulation, in accordance with Source: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act).
